                                                Gaussian free field convergence of the six-vertex model
                                                                  with −1 ≤ ∆ ≤ − 12

                                           Hugo Duminil-Copin∗†, Karol Kajetan Kozlowski‡, Piet Lammers§, and Ioan Manolescu¶

                                                                                     6 March 2026

                                                                                         Abstract
                                                     We study the isotropic six-vertex model on Z2 with√spectral parameter ∆ ∈




arXiv:2603.06268v1 [math-ph] 6 Mar 2026
                                                 [−1, −1/2], that is, with weights a = b = 1 and c ∈ [ 3, 2]. We show that the
                                                 associated height function converges, in the scaling limit, to a properly scaled full-plane
                                                 Gaussian free field. The result extends to anisotropic weights a ̸= b upon using a
                                                 suitable embedding of the lattice.

                                          A Introduction                                                                                            2
                                          1 Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                              .   .   .   .   .   .   2
                                          2 Statement of our main result . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                        .   .   .   .   .   .   7
                                          3 First applications of our result . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      .   .   .   .   .   .  11
                                          4 Overview of the proof and ingredients . . . . . . . . . . .                     .   .   .   .   .   .  14
                                          5 Organisation of the paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                         .   .   .   .   .   .  21
                                          B Proof of the main results                                                                              21
                                          6 Sub-sequential GFF limits for the two-point function . . . . . .                .   .   .   .   .   . 22
                                          7 Sub-sequential GFF limits for multi-point functions . . . . . .                 .   .   .   .   .   . 38
                                          8 Sub-sequential GFF limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                         .   .   .   .   .   . 42
                                          9 Proof of the main result (Theorem 2.8)      . . . . . . . . . .                 .   .   .   .   .   . 44
                                          10 Proof for the anisotropic case (Theorem 3.3)     . . . . . . . .               .   .   .   .   .   . 45
                                          C Ingredient 4: Spectral representation of correlation functions                                         48
                                          11 Transfer matrix formalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                        . . . . .           . 48
                                          12 Spectral representation of general observables (Theorem 4.15) . . .            . . . . .           . 50
                                          13 Spectral representation for the two-point function (Theorem 4.12) .            . . . . .           . 52
                                          D Ingredient 3: Regularity estimates and qualitative behaviour                                           55
                                          14 Spin representation and RSW theory . . . . . . . . . . .                       .   .   .   .   .   . 55
                                          15 FKG inequality of the spin representation      . . . . . . . . .               .   .   .   .   .   . 61
                                          16 Percolation estimates for the spin configuration . . . . . . . .               .   .   .   .   .   . 65
                                          17 Full-plane spin representation (incl. Theorem 4.10)   . . . . . .              .   .   .   .   .   . 70
                                          18 Torus and cylinder spin representation (Theorem 2.2) . . . . . .               .   .   .   .   .   . 72
                                          19 Bounds on crossing counts (Theorem 4.9)        . . . . . . . . .               .   .   .   .   .   . 75
                                          20 Level line tree and branching function . . . . . . . . . . .                   .   .   .   .   .   . 80
                                          21 Regularity estimate in full plane (Theorem 4.5) . . . . . . . .                .   .   .   .   .   . 85
                                          22 Regularity estimate (cylinder, Corollary 4.7) . . . . . . . . .                .   .   .   .   .   . 89
                                          23 Mixing estimate (Theorem 4.8) . . . . . . . . . . . . .                        .   .   .   .   .   . 91
                                          E Ingredient 2: Glimpse of scale invariance                                                              97
                                          24 Free energy second derivative (Theorem 4.4) . . . . . . . . .                  . . . . .           . 97
                                          25 Proof of Theorem 4.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                           . . . . .           . 101
                                          26 Proof of the splitting (Proposition 25.3) . . . . . . . . . .                  . . . . .           . 110
                                          References                                                                                              123
                                            ∗
                                              Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques, duminil@ihes.fr
                                            †
                                              Université de Genève, hugo.duminil@unige.ch
                                            ‡
                                              ENSL, CNRS, Laboratoire de Physique, F-69342 Lyon, France, karol.kozlowski@ens-lyon.fr
                                            §
                                              CNRS, Sorbonne Université, LPSM, piet.lammers@cnrs.fr
                                            ¶
                                              Université de Fribourg, ioan.manolescu@unifr.ch


                                                                                             1
Part A
Introduction
1     Motivation
1.1    Phase transitions in a nutshell
Physical systems undergoing a continuous phase transition can often be understood mathe-
matically through lattice models, in which the microscopic degrees of freedom are encoded
by variables attached to the sites, edges or faces of a graph. These models serve as ef-
fective descriptions of the underlying physical interactions while remaining amenable to
rigorous analysis. In this framework, k-point correlation functions correspond to limits of
                                                 Q (i)
expectations of products of local operators ⟨ i Oui ⟩δ . In this context, ⟨ · ⟩δ encodes the
correlations of the model on a lattice of mesh size δ, u1 , . . . , uk are points in space, the O(i)
are (potentially different) observables measuring local properties of the system near the
                 (i)                                                                           (i)
origin 0, and Oui are the translates of these observables to the points ui so that Oui is
measurable in terms of the behaviour in a small neighbourhood of ui . In the sequel, we
suppose each observable to be centred.
    Away from the phase transition, correlations are extremely weak: for any collection of
distinct points, the correlation functions decay exponentially fast in the separation distance
(here of order 1/δ) between the points u1 , . . . , uk . In other words, individual observables
decorrelate fast and become asymptotically independent.
    At a continuous phase transition, however, asymptotic independence still occurs, but
correlations are expected to be much stronger. The k-point functions exhibiting a power-law
decay with the distance:
                                           k
                                           Y
                    lim δ −(α1 +···+αk )         Ou(i)i δ = CO(1) ,...,O(k) (u1 , . . . , uk )   (1)
                    δ→0
                                           i=1

for certain non-trivial functions CO(1) ,...,O(k) and critical exponents αi = αi (O(i) ) determining
the rate of algebraic decay of the correlators at large distances.
    The functions CO(1) ,...,O(k) are predicted to be invariant under dilations and rotations,
as well as universal in the sense that they do not depend on the specific local interaction
potential appearing in the definition of the lattice model. One purpose of statistical
mechanics is to group models undergoing continuous phase transitions into universality
classes with matching critical exponents αi and limiting functions CO(1) ,...,O(k) .
    The very ideas on the behaviour of systems at continuous phase transitions date back to
the foundational works in theoretical physics from the mid-1960s to the early 1970s, notably
those of Fisher [Fis67; Fis66; Fis64], Kadanoff [Kad66], and Widom [Wid65b; Wid65a],
culminating in Wilson’s renormalisation-group theory [Wil71a; Wil71b]. The predictions
have been tested extensively against perturbative calculations in a wide range of settings,
effective models, and experimental data, as well as through numerical simulations [Kad+67;
EF63; DS57; Bak61; El-+12; KPS14].

1.2    The CFT conjectural limit of lattice models
It is not a priori clear what the hypothetical universality classes should be. One line
of thought, originating in the works of Patashinskii and Pokrovskii [PP64] and later
Polyakov [Pol68; Pol70b; Pol70a], is that universality classes should be captured by quantum

                                                       2
field theories that are invariant under not only scaling and rotations, but also conformal
transformations. Such quantum fields theories are called Conformal Field Theories (CFTs).
This led to the following loosely stated conjecture.
Conjecture 1. The scaling limits in the sense of Equation (1) of two-dimensional statistical
mechanics models undergoing a continuous phase transition, are given by the correlation
functions of a CFT.
     In general dimension, the additional requirement of being invariant under conformal
maps is not so restrictive, since the local conformal group is finite-dimensional and thus
imposes only limited constraints. However, as observed in the groundbreaking work of
Belavin, Polyakov, and Zamolodchikov [BPZ84], the situation improves dramatically in
two dimensions: there, the conformal group is infinite-dimensional and the resulting local
conformal symmetry leads to the integrability of numerous CFTs in the plane; we refer to
the mathematically-oriented textbook [Gaw] for details.
     Two-dimensional CFTs are classified by their central charge c ∈ R>0 . After extensive
investigations in the 1980s and 1990s, these theories turned out to be amenable to a
substantial degree of analysis on physical grounds [Tes19; DMS97]. On the mathematical
side, apart from the numerous early developments (cf. [Gaw; Seg88]), there has recently
been a renewed interest in these CFTs within the probability community, driven by the
development of the Schramm–Loewner Evolution [Sch00; Law14] (and the associated models
constructed from it [SW12; MS16; She09; MS20; GRV16]) as well as by rigorous techniques
based on [Dav+16; RV14; GRV19].
     In many cases, one can provide a rather detailed description of the CFTs correlation
functions. The understanding of the CFT with c = 1 – the free boson model, known to
mathematicians as the Gaussian free field – is straightforward thanks to its Gaussian nature.
In particular, Wick’s rule expresses k-point correlations in terms of products of 2-point
correlations, which significantly streamlines their analysis. We refer to [She07; BP25] for
details on this specific case. The rational CFTs, notably the minimal models corresponding
                   2
to c = 1 − 6 (p−q)
                pq   with p, q ≥ 2 coprime integers, are also very well-understood thanks to
algebraic structures specific to these central charges [DGT24; DW25; GZ26; Fje+06; FRS02;
FRS04a; FRS04b; FRS05]. For c ≥ 25, the theory is well developed, as in [Tes95; Tes01],
and more recently in the mathematics literature in [DS11; BP25; DS11; DS11; Gui+24].
Fully determining the correlations of CFTs still is the a subject of intense study both on
the physical and mathematical sides, see e.g. [Ang+21; KRV20; Gui+24; CRV23; GZ26;
DW25].
     Today’s understanding of CFTs, even though not fully exhaustive, is very impressive.
Still, even if one were given a complete and rigorous description of all two-dimensional
CFTs, a thorough understanding of the continuous phase transition exhibited by a given
lattice model still requires the following two challenging steps:
   (i) identifying which CFT (that is, which value of the central charge c and which
       representation of the corresponding CFT algebraic structure), if any, captures the
       relevant limit at criticality;
  (ii) identifying which correlation functions of that CFT describe the limits of the k-point
       functions of the chosen local observables. Concretely, in the setting of Equation (1),
       this amounts to identifying the functions CO(1) ,...,O(k) with appropriate correlation
       functions of the CFT in question.

1.3   From discrete to continuum
In order to go in this direction, two principal strategies have been developed over the years.

                                              3
1.3.1   Extracting information from the transfer matrix formalism
For models that admit a transfer-matrix formulation, analysing the leading eigenvalues of the
transfer matrix TL of a system of size L with periodic boundary conditions, yields valuable
information about the limiting behaviour. It is well known that the exponential growth
rate of the largest eigenvalue of TL determines the free energy of the model. Moreover,
as argued heuristically in [Aff86; BCN86], the finite-size correction to the free energy –
equivalently, the subleading correction to the principal eigenvalue – produces a constant that
is interpreted, conjecturally, as the central charge of the conformal field theory expected to
govern the model’s behaviour at criticality.
     Additional information can be extracted from the large-L asymptotics of the subleading
eigenvalues of the transfer matrix and the so-called translation operator (both of which
will appear in this paper). In particular, conjectural equations relate the spacing of these
eigenvalues to the possible values of critical exponents associated with local observables.
The above physical picture is thus rather comprehensive, although it does not specify
which critical exponent corresponds to a given lattice correlation function. This last step is
typically achieved, at a physical level of rigour, through symmetry considerations. We refer
to [Car86; Car08] for reviews.
     While constructing a transfer matrix from a local Hamiltonian is often straightforward,
extracting the large-volume asymptotics is an arduous task. For a generic model, this
problem is hopeless – even at a heuristic level. However, the situation improves dramatically
for integrable models of two-dimensional statistical mechanics [Bax82].
     The simplest example in this direction is the two-dimensional Ising model in vanishing
external field, originally solved by Onsager [Ons44] and later revisited in many different
ways (see [MW14; Dum23] for historical accounts). Kaufman [Kau49] and later Lieb-
Schultz-Mattis [LSM61] observed that the Ising model becomes equivalent, through a
simple algebraic transformation, to a model of non-interacting (or free) fermions. This
free-fermionic structure explains, to a large extent, the particularly simple exact solvability
of the model. In particular, it leads to a closed and fully explicit formula for the eigenvalues
of its transfer matrix, see for example [Bax82] for a modern treatment. This analysis
provides evidence that the scaling limit of the model at criticality is governed by the
conformal field theory with central charge c = 1/2.
     The situation is considerably more involved for other integrable models of two-dimensional
statistical mechanics undergoing continuous phase transitions. These models are genuinely
interacting, meaning that no simple mapping reduces them to free fermions. They remain
solvable in the sense that their transfer matrices can be diagonalised in a relatively explicit
manner, but doing so requires solving a system of Bethe Ansatz equations, determin-
ing which solutions correspond to the dominant and and to the tower of sub-dominant
eigenvalues, and analysing their behaviour as L tends to infinity.
     In the mid-1980s and 1990s, substantial effort produced, on heuristic grounds, expansions
of the top eigenvalues of the transfer matrix for a wide range of integrable two-dimensional
models at criticality [DV95; dW85; IKR89; KB90; KBP91; KWZ93]. Although non-rigorous,
this body of work yielded extensive conjectures for the central charges and critical exponents
governing the scaling limits of many integrable lattice models.
     A main obstacle to full mathematical rigour lies in the difficulty of proving the con-
densation of Bethe roots, a property originally conjectured by Hülten [Hul38]. Significant
progress was made in [DS09; Dum+21; Dum+22; Gus80; Gus85; Koz18], culminating in
the first rigorous derivations of expansions of top eigenvalues for the transfer matrix of the
six-vertex model [Koz18] and for the staggered six-vertex model [FGK25], which arises in
the analysis of the XXZ spin-1/2 chain at finite temperature.

                                               4
1.3.2    Discrete holomorphicity and conformal invariant scaling limits
A second strategy roots in the development of discrete holomorphicity. The development
of boundary CFTs, which incorporate the effect of boundary conditions, has significantly
deepened the physical analysis of conformal field theories. The intuition that studying
physical systems in planar domains can reveal additional structure has led, within the
mathematical literature, to major breakthroughs in our understanding of the scaling limits
of two-dimensional models. The idea is to harvest the fact that conformally invariant (or
rather covariant) families of correlations in the continuum are often harmonic or holomorphic
solutions of certain boundary value problems. It is therefore natural to expect that in a
certain sense, discrete ancestors to these correlations are discrete harmonic or holomorphic
solutions to the corresponding discrete boundary value problem. This observation proved
successful for a few models during the first decade of the millennium.
     One of the early rigorous proofs of conformal invariance concerns domino tilings,
which possess an underlying free-fermionic structure. Kenyon [Ken00; CKP01] established
conformal invariance in the scaling limit for the height-function distribution of domino
tilings on bipartite Temperleyan planar graphs by showing that certain observables are
discrete holomorphic and satisfy a Dirichlet boundary value problem. He further proved
the convergence of the height function (seen as a distribution) to the Gaussian free field,
corresponding to the CFT with central charge c = 1 (the free boson). This analysis was
extended to periodic isoradial graphs in [Til07], a class preserving exact solvability and
discrete holomorphic structure.
     In 2001, Smirnov [Smi01] proved the celebrated Cardy formula [Car92] for Bernoulli site
percolation on the triangular lattice. Smirnov’s argument relies on a certain approximately
discrete holomorphic observables satisfying certain boundary conditions, which can be shown
to converge to the solution of the continuum analogue of this boundary value problem.
This major achievement led to a very precise description of the critical regime, including
the determination of critical exponents and links to c = 0 CFT [LSW02; Smi01; CN07;
CN06; CN26; CF24].
     In 2004, Lawler, Schramm, and Werner [LSW04] derived the conformal invariance of the
loop-erased random walk and the associated Uniform Spanning Tree (UST) by exploiting
properties of the discrete Green function, making the approach close in spirit to strategies
above. Note that the UST is closely connected to the dimer model and also enjoys a
free-fermionic structure.
     In 2008, Smirnov [Smi10] and Chelkak-Smirnov [CS12] developed a discrete-holomorphic
framework for fermionic observables of the two-dimensional Ising model, showing that
they converge in the scaling limit to holomorphic solutions of appropriate Riemann-Hilbert
boundary-value problems. Extensions of this method to isoradial graphs yielded robust
convergence results for fermionic observables and demonstrated universality and conformal
symmetry in the scaling limit. Further developments led to a multitude of scaling-limit
results for interfaces [Che+14], the energy-density observable [HS13], its n-point generalisa-
tions [Hon], spin correlators [CHI15], and eventually correlation functions corresponding to
primary CFT operators [CHI22]. These works collectively yield the link to the c = 12 CFT.

1.4     Beyond the free fermion point
Except for Bernoulli site percolation [Smi01] and a reverse-engineered model known as the
harmonic explorer [SS05], all rigorous progress on scaling limits achieved so far concern
models that reduce to non-interacting (free) fermions. Yet the main appeal of the CFT
universality conjecture (Conjecture 1) for continuous phase transitions lies precisely in its

                                              5
breadth: it is intended to encompass genuinely interacting models, far removed from any
structure reminiscent of free theories. However, once interactions are present, the analysis
becomes considerably more intricate.
    Rigorous progress has been achieved for small perturbations of free-fermionic models,
such as weakly interacting dimers. These results rely on constructive renormalisation,
the rigorous embodiment of Wilson’s renormalisation-group program. Initiated in [PS],
this method has been further developed to establish scaling properties for a variety of
perturbative models [Mas04; GGM12; BFM14a; BFM14b; GMT17; GT19]. While these
works represent a significant advance, they remain confined to perturbative regimes: the very
nature of constructive renormalisation makes it extremely difficult to reach non-perturbative
settings or scaling limits far from free fermionic ones.
    In this light, the genuinely interacting integrable models of two-dimensional statistical
mechanics form a natural testing ground for Conjecture 1. These models are not equivalent
to free fermions except, possibly, at isolated parameter values, and they possess a rich
algebraic structure arising from the representation theory of quantum groups. This structure
manifests in key identities such as the star–triangle relation [Ken99; DLM18] and in the
commutativity of families of transfer matrices [Bax72; STF79], providing powerful tools
that are unavailable for generic models.
    A particularly prominent example of a genuinely interacting integrable model is the
six-vertex model ; see, for instance, [LW80; Bax82].

     This paper provides the first scaling-limit result for the six-vertex model across a substan-
tial range of parameters. Specifically, for ∆ ∈ [−1, − 21 ], we prove that the height function
of the full-plane model converges to the Gaussian free field as the mesh size tends to zero.
Although our result is currently restricted to the full-plane setting, it constitutes an important
first step towards a more general framework for establishing scaling limits of planar models,
as it applies to a broad class of genuinely interacting models. As such, it belongs to a larger
program aimed at determining the behaviour of critical lattice models in two dimensions
deep in the interaction regime.

    It is of course premature to discuss the proof (especially since we did not yet introduce
the model nor the result properly) in full detail, but let us briefly indicate that the argument
draws on ideas inspired by both the transfer-matrix formalism and discrete holomorphicity.
In this sense, it synthesises elements of the two historical approaches outlined above.
Roughly speaking, we exploit the properties of a certain spectral measure that encodes the
averaged behaviour of the eigenvalues of the transfer matrix and shift operator, and use
this to show that the k-point correlations of the six-vertex model are harmonic in the limit.
To achieve this, we combine the rotational invariance of the model obtained in [Ave+a]
with a novel analysis of spectral properties. This constitutes the main innovation of the
paper. The harmonicity, combined with an analysis of the behaviour near singular points,
allows us to identify these limiting k-point correlations, which can then be bootstrapped to
obtain stronger modes of convergence. To be more precise, our proof begins by establishing
convergence only along certain suitable sub-sequences. It ends up being sufficient to deduce
the full result, which in turn retroactively ensures that passing to sub-sequences was
unnecessary.
    The ability to extract such sub-sequential limits is in fact another main innovations
of the paper. The framework in which we work permits the use of qualitative estimates
for the model – reminiscent of the RSW-type theory familiar to percolation specialists
(we shall discuss RSW theory in depth) – to obtain compactness and extract convergent
sub-sequences of the spectral measure mentioned above. This strategy resonates with

                                                6
what made the proof of Cardy’s formula for Bernoulli site percolation on the triangular
lattice possible. In [Smi01], Smirnov goes around the problem of having observables that
are only approximately holomorphic by showing that RSW-theory enables one to extract
sub-sequential limits for these discrete observables, which end up being holomorphic. A
leitmotif emerges: in order to move beyond the ‘ultra-integrable’ cases of models possessing
a free-fermion structure in which exactly discrete harmonic or holomorphic observables
can be found, one likely needs to work in a setting where the absence of exact discrete
harmonicity or holomorphicity can be compensated by a priori estimates that ensure the
existence of sub-sequential limits. The objects introduced in this paper illustrates the
advantage and the potential of such a perspective.


2     Statement of our main result
This section formally introduces the model and states the main results.

2.1    Definition of the six-vertex model
In this paper, the six-vertex model is defined on graphs which locally look like the
square lattice graph. We start with a definition on tori. For M, L ∈ Z≥4 , let TM,L =
(V (TM,L ), E(TM,L )) denote the toroidal square grid on the vertex set V (TM,L ) := (Z/M Z)×
(Z/LZ), with edges placed between vertices at Euclidean distance 1 from each other.
    An arrow configuration ω is an assignment of an orientation to each edge. An arrow
configuration is said to satisfy the ice rule (or be a six-vertex configuration) if every vertex
has exactly two incoming and two outgoing edges. As a result, there are six possible
arrangements of incoming and outgoing edges around each vertex, labelled according to
Figure 1.

Definition 2.1 (Six-vertex model on the torus). For parameters a1 , a2 , b1 , b2 , c1 , c2 > 0,
the weight of an arrow configuration ω on TM,L is given by

                 W6V (ω) = 1[ω satisfies the ice rule] · an1 1 an2 2 bn1 3 bn2 4 cn1 5 cn2 6 ,   (2)

where ni denotes the number of vertices in V (TM,L ) of type i in ω. The Gibbs measure
PTM,L on arrow configurations ω is given by

                                                        1
                                  PTM,L [{ω}] :=            · W6V (ω),                           (3)
                                                      ZTM,L

where ZTM,L is the unique constant, called the partition function, rendering PTM,L a
probability measure.

   The weights were taken to be positive reals for a probabilistic interpretation. In this
work, we further specialise to the case where

                      a1 = a2 =: a;           b1 = b2 =: b;            c1 = c2 =: c,             (4)




             Figure 1: The six vertex configurations with labels and weights.


                                                      7
which renders W6V (ω) invariant under flipping all orientations in ω. The parameters a, b,
and c are always fixed in this article, which is why they do not appear in notations. It is
standard to introduce the spectral parameter defined by the formula
                                                 a2 + b2 − c2
                                ∆ = ∆(a, b, c) =              .                            (5)
                                                      2ab
    The model may be extended to infinite volume in the following fashion. Any configuration
on TM,L that obeys the ice rule has the same number of left-arrows on each vertical column
– we call this preservation of horizontal arrows. A configuration is called balanced if, for
every vertical column of horizontal arrows, the number of left-arrows equals the number of
right-arrows. Write {balanced} for the collection of balanced arrow configurations satisfying
the ice rule. From now on, L is always even, so that balanced configurations exist.
    For ∆ < −1, the six-vertex model is known to be in a localised regime, implying trivial
limiting behaviour [Dum+21; RS22; GP23]. Therefore, we focus in the whole paper on the
case ∆ ≥ −1, which corresponds, when a = b = 1, to c ≤ 2. We shall derive the following
know result en passant in Lemma 18.7).
Theorem 2.2 (Infinite-volume six-vertex model). Fix a = b = 1 and c ∈ [1, 2]. The weak
limit of the measures PTM,L [ · |{balanced}] exists when the limits are taken in the following
order: first M tends to infinity, and then L tends to infinity. We denote it PZ2 and call it
the six-vertex measure in the plane with slope zero. It is invariant under the automorphism
group of Z2 .
    This result asserts that PZ2 is the unique probability measure on arrow configurations
of the square lattice graph Z2 such that
                          lim    lim PTM,L [A|{balanced}] = PZ2 [A]                         (6)
                         L→∞ M →∞

for any event A that is measurable in terms of the orientation of finitely many edges of the
square lattice graph Z2 . The measure PZ2 may be characterised in several other ways. In
addition to the above description, it is also the weak limit of PTM,L as M, L tend to infinity
in arbitrary fashion, it is the unique ergodic Gibbs measure which is invariant under a
global arrow flip, and it is the unique minimiser of a free energy functional related to the
six-vertex model. The last two equivalent statements do not play a role in this work.
    Theorem 2.2 and the above equivalences follow from the general analysis of height
functions in [She05] combined with delocalisation of the height function. Delocalisation
was first derived at c = 1 [Cha+21], c = 2 [GP23], and c ∈ [(2 + 21/2 )1/2 , 2] [Lis21], before
the full range c ∈ [1, 2] was covered in [Dum+24] via a Bethe Ansatz argument, and later
in [GL25] using a percolation approach.

2.2    Height function of the six-vertex model
A height function is a function h : F (Z2 ) → Z on the faces F (Z2 ) of the square lattice
which differs by exactly ±1 between any two adjacent faces. We also require the face on
the north-east of the origin to have an even height.
     We will consider height functions up to addition of an even constant. Formally, consider
two height functions h′ and h equivalent if there exists some constant a ∈ 2Z such that
h′ (u) = h(u) + a for all u ∈ F (Z2 ). Gradients of height functions are simply the equivalence
classes of height functions for this equivalence relation. For all practical purposes, we
identify gradients of height functions with any representative of the equivalence class.
Finally, we shall write also h for the piecewise constant function
          h : R2 → Z, (x, y) 7→ h(the face whose bottom-left corner is (⌊x⌋, ⌊y⌋)),         (7)

                                              8
Figure 2: The six-vertex configuration and gradient height function are related such that
the higher height is on the left of each arrow.

and, for any δ > 0, we define the scaled height function h(δ) : R2 → Z, u 7→ h(u/δ).
Definition 2.3 (Height function of a six-vertex configuration). Full-plane six-vertex
configurations are in bijection with gradient height functions. More precisely, we associate
any six-vertex configuration ω with the height functions for which the height of the face on
the left of each arrow is one unit higher than the height of that on its right; see Figure 2.
   The multi-point correlation functions of gradient height-functions will be the core
observables in our study of the six-vertex model’s height function.
Definition 2.4 (Six-vertex multi-point correlation functions). The k-point correlation
function of the six-vertex model assigns to the vector u = (u1 , u′1 , . . . , uk , u′k ) ∈ (R2 )2k
whose 2k coordinates are built out of points u1 , u′1 , . . . , uk , u′k ∈ R2 , the quantity
                                         " k                           #
                                          Y
                                              h(u′i ) − h(ui ) ,                                (8)
                                                                     
                           Φk (u) := EZ2
                                                  i=1

where h denotes any height function associated with the six-vertex configuration sampled
according to PZ2 . Moreover, for δ > 0, the scaled k-point correlation function is defined as
                            (δ)
                          Φk (u) := Φk (u1 /δ, u′1 /δ, . . . , uk /δ, u′k /δ).                 (9)
   The k-point correlation function is well-defined, as the integrand in the expectation is
depends only on the gradient of the height function. We immediately recognise a few basic
properties of Φk , which we often use without further mention:
              (δ)
   • Φk ≡ Φk ≡ 0 for k odd since h and −h have the same distribution,
                 (δ)
   • Φk and Φk are antisymmetric under swapping ui and u′i ,
                 (δ)
   • Φk and Φk are invariant under permuting the pairs {ui , u′i },
                  (δ)
   • Φk and Φk satisfy the following additivity property for any u1 , u′1 , u′′1 and for any
     fixed v = (u2 , u′2 , . . . , uk , u′k ):
                            Φk (u1 , u′1 , v) + Φk (u′1 , u′′1 , v) = Φk (u1 , u′′1 , v).     (10)
    Although one primary object of interest is the k-point correlation, we will also treat
the height function h as a random distribution. To that end, we introduce the distribution
defined by integrating h against test functions.
Definition 2.5 (Six-vertex test functions). A generalised test function is a finite, compactly
supported, signed measure φ on R2 with φ(R2 ) = 0. For any generalised test function φ,
define                            Z                  Z
                        (δ)           (δ)
                     ⟨h , φ⟩ := h (x)dφ(x) = h(x/δ)dφ(x).                                 (11)

Observe that ⟨h(δ) , φ⟩ is a gradient measurable random variable because φ(R2 ) = 0. We
may therefore interpret it as a random variable.

                                                     9
2.3   Background on the Gaussian free field
With the model in place, we next describe the scaling limit that will ultimately arise. Write
| · | for the Euclidean norm on R2 . Define the full-plane Green function GR2 as

                    GR2 : R2 × R2 → (−∞, ∞], (x, y) 7→ − 2π
                                                          1
                                                            log |y − x|.                             (12)

Our main result below says that as δ tends to zero, the random height function h(δ) obtained
from PZ2 converges (up to scaling by a constant σ = σ(∆)) to the Gaussian free field (GFF),
which we denote Γ. There are various mathematical ways to view the GFF depending on
the desired regularity of the object; here, we need the following three (which resonate with
Definitions 2.4 and 2.5). For more details on GFF, see [BP25].

Definition 2.6 (GFF definitions). We consider three perspectives on the GFF.
 (i) Multi-point correlation functions. For any k ≥ 1, define

              Dk := {(ui , u′i )i=1,...,k ∈ (R2 × R2 )k : ∀i ̸= j, {ui , u′i } ∩ {uj , u′j } = ∅},   (13)

      and define the functions
                                                     X                 Y
                         ΨGFF
                          k   : Dk → R, u 7→                (−1)ε(a)          GR2 (ai , aj ),        (14)
                                                     a, π              ij∈π

      where:
         • The sum over a runs over maps {1, . . . , k} → {u1 , u′1 , . . . , uk , u′k } with ai ∈
            {ui , u′i },
         • ε(a) ∈ Z/2Z is the parity of the number of indices i such that ui is chosen,
         • The sum over π runs over all pairings of {1, . . . , k}, that is, all partitions of
            {1, . . . , k} into pairs (i.e. sets containing two points).
      These are precisely the correlation functions corresponding to a Gaussian process
      with covariance GR2 . Notice that ΨGFF      k   ≡ 0 when k is odd since π is then empty.
 (ii) Finite-dimensional         marginals.     We  say that a generalised test function φ has finite
      Dirichlet energy if GR2 (u, v)dφ(u)dφ(v) < ∞. For any finite family φ = (φ1 , . . . , φn )
                             R

      of finite Dirichlet energy generalised test functions, introduce the associated n × n
      covariance matrix Σ(φ) defined via
                                                Z
                                    Σ(φ)ij := GR2 (u, v)dφi (u)dφj (v).                          (15)

       We then think of (⟨Γ, φi ⟩)i as a random variable having the law N (0, Σ(φ)).
 (iii) Random element of a negative regularity Hölder space. Fix α ∈ (−1, 0) and
       a bounded open set U ⊂ R2 . Recall that the Hölder space C α (U ) of regularity α on
       U is the completion of Cc∞ (R2 ) with respect to the semi-norm
                                                                    Z
                             ∞                                   −α
                                 2
            ∥ · ∥C α (U ) : Cc (R ) → R, f 7→      sup         ε      f (x/ε)dφ(x),     (16)
                                                (ε,φ)∈(0,1]×T1 ((−1,1)2 ),
                                                    support(φ)⊂U/ε


      where T (U ) denotes the set of generalised test functions whose support is included in
      U and T1 (U ) ⊂ T (U ) the set of such test functions whose density is 1-Lipschitz. We
      view Γ as a random element in C α (U ) such that, for any finite φ = (φ1 , . . . , φk ) with
      φi ∈ T (U ) for every i, the law of (⟨Γ, φi ⟩)i is N (0, Σ(φ)).

                                                   10
2.4    Statement of the main result
Three modes of convergence are considered.
Definition 2.7 (GFF convergence). Consider some fixed value σ ∈ R≥0 as well as a random
gradient height function h : R2 → R in some probability measure P. We say that the scaling
limit of h is σΓ or σ · GFF if all of the statements below hold true.
                                                                                       (δ)
    (i) Convergence of multi-point correlation functions. For any k ≥ 1, Φk converges
        uniformly on compact subsets of Dk to σ k ΨGFF k   as δ tends to zero.
   (ii) Convergence of finite-dimensional marginals. For any family φ = (φ1 , . . . , φn )
        of finite Dirichlet energy generalised test functions, the law of (⟨h(δ) , φi ⟩)i converges
        weakly to N (0, σ 2 Σ(φ)) as δ tends to zero.
  (iii) Convergence in law in a negative regularity Hölder space. For any α ∈ (−1, 0)
        and any open bounded U ⊂ R2 , the law of h(δ) converges to that of σΓ in C α (U ) as
        δ tends to zero. Finally, we also require convergence in the classical Besov spaces
          α (U ) and Sobolev spaces W α,p (U ) for any p ∈ [1, ∞) and q ∈ [1, ∞] (see Section 8
        Bp,q
        for details).
    We are now in a position to state our main result.
Theorem 2.8 (Scaling limit of the six vertex model with isotropic weights).
                                                                        √ The scaling
                                                    2
limit of the six-vertex model’s height function on Z with a = b = 1 and 3 ≤ c ≤ 2 is
σ · GFF, where
                                             2         1
                                  σ2 =            =           .                               (17)
                                         arccos ∆   arcsin c2

    Let us comment on our requirement on the parameters. In terms of ∆, the previous
theorem covers the regime −1 ≤ ∆ ≤ − 12 . The restriction on the isotropic case (i.e., with
weights a = b = 1) is lifted in Theorem 3.3 below. Recall that the isotropic six-vertex
model with c > 2 (∆ < −1) is known to be in a localised regime. Theorem 2.8 is expected
to hold true for all√c ∈ (0, 2] (i.e., ∆ ∈ [−1, 1)) and was previously
                                                              √        obtained at the free
fermion point c = 2 (∆ = 0) in [Ken00] and for c close to 2 in [GMT17].
    Two aspects of our proof require lower bounds on c. First, the Fortuin–Kasteleyn–
Ginibre (FKG) property for several representations of the six-vertex model requires that
c ≥ 1. This property is used to obtain regularity of our objects at various stages of the
proof. Second, our proof relies on the asymptotic rotational invariance of the multi-point
correlation functions Φk , which was obtained in [Ave+a] using the corresponding random-
cluster model [Dum+20]. For that result  √ to apply, the random-cluster model must exhibit
the FKG property, which requires c ≥ 3.
    An extension of this asymptotic rotational invariance result to c ≥ 1 is conceivable, for
instance by using the above-mentioned representations of the six-vertex model. This would
immediately allow the extension of Theorem 2.8 to the interval 1 ≤ c ≤ 2 (corresponding
to −1 ≤ ∆ ≤ 1/2). However, circumventing the absence of the FKG inequality for the
representations of the six-vertex model appears to be a formidable challenge, placing the
case 0 < c < 1 beyond the reach of current methods.


3     First applications of our result
The six-vertex model in the regime −1 ≤ ∆ < 1 lies at the crossroads of a large family of
two-dimensional lattice models. It is closely related to the dimer model, the Ising and Potts
models, the critical random-cluster model, loop O(n) models, Ashkin–Teller models, random

                                                11
permutations, and quantum spin chains [FK72; Nie82; GP23; Lis22; MW68]. While it is
not yet clear how much information can ultimately be extracted from the GFF convergence
established here, several significant applications are already available.

3.1    Critical exponents of other two-dimensional lattice models
Thanks to the Baxter–Kelland–Wu (BKW) correspondence [BKW76], the six-vertex model
is intimately connected, at its continuous phase transition, to the critical random-cluster
model – also called the Fortuin-Kasteleyn (FK) percolation – introduced in [FK72]. Our
main result enables the following consequences for random-cluster models.
    • One-arm exponent α1 . For the random-cluster model with cluster-weight q ∈ [1, 4],
       [Che+b] obtains the existence and value of the one-arm critical exponent α1 , describing
       the decay of the probability that a vertex connects to distance n. In turn, this derives
       the classical exponents η, ζ, and δ governing the behaviour of the two-point function,
       the cluster-size tail at criticality, and the ghost-field connectivity; see [Che+b] for
       details.
    • Two-arm exponent α2 . For the random-cluster model with q ∈ [1, 4], [ADH] obtains
       the existence and value of the two-arm exponent α2 , describing the probability that a
       vertex lies on a primal/dual interface extending to distance n. As a consequence, one
       deduces the fractal dimension of any sub-sequential scaling limit of critical interfaces,
       in agreement with the predicted CLE(κ); see [ADH] for details.
    • Energy exponent ι. For the random-cluster model with q ∈ [4 − ε, 4] (for some small
       value of ε), the articles [Che+a; Ave+b] determine the so-called influence exponent ι,
       which controls the covariance of observables at criticality. Combined with the scaling
       relations established in [DM22], this yields the thermodynamic critical exponents α,
       β, γ, and ν, governing respectively the behaviour of the free energy, the spontaneous
       magnetisation, the susceptibility, and the correlation length.
    Finally, since the random-cluster model is coupled to the Potts model, all the above
critical exponents transfer directly to the two, three and four state Potts models. These
results were already known for two-state Potts case, better known as the Ising model, but
are new for the three- and four-state Potts models.
    We expect that more results can be obtained in this direction, both for the random-
cluster model and other models.

Remark 3.1. We stress that the critical exponents obtained here do not rely on evaluating
the top eigenvalues of the transfer matrix. Instead, they harvest Theorem 2.8 which is
based on an analysis of the average behaviour of certain eigenvalues, well-separated from
the spectral edge. In this sense, our approach circumvents the major difficulty of providing
a rigorous justification for computations of the leading eigenvalues.

3.2    Scaling limit of specific random-cluster observables
Harvesting the BKW correspondence [BKW76] allows one to derive the scaling limit of
certain random-cluster observables at criticality. In particular, the characteristic function
of six-vertex test functions ⟨h(δ) , φ⟩ can be expressed as the expectation – under the
random-cluster model – of a product of suitably twisted weights associated with the loops
                                                                        √
of a percolation configuration. More precisely, if µ = 2π    1
                                                               arccos( q/2) and cosµ (·) :=
cos(· + 2πµ)/ cos(2πµ), then
                           h (δ) i              hY                 i
                       E6V
                        Z2  e i⟨h ,φ⟩
                                       = ϕ   2
                                           δZ ,q    cos µ φ(int(ℓ))   ,                  (18)
                                                   ℓ∈L


                                              12
where ϕδZ2 ,q denotes the law of the ensemble L of loops on δZ2 arising from the loop
representation of the critical random-cluster measure with cluster-weight q, and where
int(ℓ) is the interior of the loop ℓ, i.e., the bounded connected component of R2 \ ℓ when ℓ
is viewed as a continuous simple path. Variants of this identity have appeared repeatedly
in the literature; see, for instance, [Dub11]. We refer to [Ave+a] for more details on this
formula.
    The convergence to the Gaussian free field yields the following corollary, which underpins
the derivation of the critical exponents presented in the previous section.

Corollary 3.2. Fix q ∈ [1, 4]. For every finite Dirichlet energy generalized test function φ,
                hY                                   ZZ
                                  i                                             
    lim ϕδZ2 ,q    cosµ φ(int(ℓ)) = exp − 2 σ   1 2
                                                         GR2 (x, y)φ(x)φ(y)dxdy ,        (19)
      δ→0
                 ℓ∈L
                         √
                             q
where σ 2 = 2/ arccos(− 2 ).

3.3    Applications to the anisotropic six-vertex model
The universality of the the random-cluster model derived in [Dum+20] enables us to transfer
our main result to the anisotropic six-vertex model (weights a ̸= b). It is customary to
parametrize (a, b, c) in the following way: let ζ = arccos(−∆) and θ ∈ (0, π) be the unique
angle such that, if 1 > ∆ > −1

               a sin ζ2 = sin((1 − πθ )ζ),        b sin ζ2 = sin θζ
                                                                 π,       c = 2 cos ζ2 .   (20)

and if ∆ = −1,

                                  a = 2 π−θ
                                         π ,      b = 2 πθ ,   c = 2.                      (21)

The parameter θ encodes the natural embedding of the square lattice; θ = π/2 encodes the
isotropic case. More precisely, let

                       Lθ : R2 → R2 , (x, y) 7→ (x + cos(θ)y, sin(θ)y).                    (22)

The combination of the universality result of [Dum+20], the consequences of the Baxter–
Kelland–Wu coupling obtained in [Ave+a], and Theorem 2.8 implies the following result.

Theorem 3.3 (Scaling limit of the six vertex model with general weights). The height
function of the six-vertex model on Lθ Z2 with a, b, c > 0 such that ∆ ∈ [−1, −1/2] is
converging in the sense of Definition 2.7, Items (i) and (ii) to σ · GFF, where

                                            2         1          2
                                 σ2 =            =        c =         .                    (23)
                                        arccos ∆   arcsin 2   (π − ζ)

    Note that we do not claim convergence in the sense of Definition 2.7(iii), i.e., in Hölder
spaces. This omission is purely technical. In order to keep the paper to a reasonable length,
we chose to rely as much as possible on the so-called spin representation of the six-vertex
height function (discussed at length below). Establishing the necessary RSW theory of
this spin representation is relatively direct in the isotropic case but is not available the
anisotropic setting. While [Ave+a] works directly in the anisotropic regime, it does not
provide the regularity estimate required here (see Remark 10.1 for further discussion).

                                                   13
4     Overview of the proof and ingredients
We give below a roadmap to the proof of our main result, Theorem 2.8. Theorem 3.3 will
be derived from Theorem 2.8 in Section 10; outside of that section, we only consider the
isotropic case a = b = 1.

4.1     Overview of the proof structure
The proof of the convergence result in the isotropic case (Theorem 2.8) consists of four steps
performed in Part B, informally described as follows. We say that h converges to σ · GFF
along some sequence (δn )n tending to zero if each of the convergences in Definition 2.7 holds
true along that sequence of scales.
                                                              (δ)
   1. Theorem 6.1 asserts that the two-point function Φ2 satisfies a dichotomy: either
        (δ)
      Φ2 converges to σ 2 · ΨGFF
                               2    for some σ ≥ 0, or such a convergence holds true along
      two sub-sequences with two distinct values of σ.
   2. Theorem 7.1 enables one to pass from two-point to multi-point correlation functions
                                                                      (δ )
      in the following sense: if along some sub-sequence (δn )n , Φ2 n tends to σ 2 · ΨGFF2   ,
             (δn )
      then Φk tends to σ · Ψk
                            k    GFF for every k. This extends the dichotomy of Theorem 6.1
      to all multi-point correlation functions.
   3. Theorem 8.1 states that if along some sub-sequence (δn )n , all correlation functions
      converge to those of σ · GFF, then the limit of h(δn ) is σ · GFF (in the sense of
      Definition 2.7). This extends the dichotomy of Theorem 6.1 to all modes of GFF
      convergence.
   4. Theorems 4.3 and 4.4 jointly imply that if for some (δn )n , h(δn ) converges to
      σ · GFF, then σ 2 = 2/ arccos ∆. This makes the dichotomy collapse to a single case,
      and completes the proof of the main result.
    To compactly state the proofs of these steps in Part B, we rely on four proof ingredients
which are used as “black boxes” in Part B (see Table 1). These “black boxes” are developed
in Parts C–E. In short, they are described as follows.
   1. Rotational invariance. The correlation functions are asymptotically rotationally
      invariant. More precisely, any sub-sequential scaling limit of the correlation functions,
      is rotationally invariant.
   2. Glimpse of scale invariance. A suitably chosen “observable” converges in the
      scaling limit, and we can calculate its limit explicitly.
   3. Regularity estimates and qualitative behaviour. We establish suitable bounds
      on the correlation functions which hold true at all scales.
   4. Spectral representation of correlation functions. Correlation functions may be
      expressed in terms of the spectra of two commuting transfer matrices.
    The first two ingredients (rotation invariance and a weak form of scale invariance) echo


                             Ingredient 1:   Ingredient 2:   Ingredient 3:    Ingredient 4:
                               Rotation          Scale       Regularity of      Spectral
                              invariance      invariance      correlations   representation
    Step 1: Two-point             X                                X               X
    Step 2: Multi-point           X                                X               X
    Step 3: Test functions                                         X
    Step 4: Finding σ                              X               X

               Table 1: Use of the proof ingredients in the global proof steps


                                              14
the discussion at the beginning of the paper and are consistent with physics predictions,
especially those arising from the renormalization-group formalism. We emphasize, however,
that these properties are not obtained through a rigorous renormalization-group analysis.
The third ingredient (regularity estimates) corresponds to qualitative bounds expected for
generic continuous phase transitions.
    The fourth ingredient is more mysterious. We interpret it as follows. Since the work of
Polyakov [Pol68; Pol70b; Pol70a], it has been predicted that conformal invariance should
follow from rotation, scale, and translation invariance (the latter being trivial for our
model), provided the theory also satisfies a suitable locality principle. While our spectral
representation does not directly yield locality of the observables, it allows us to relate the
effect of applying the Laplacian to correlation functions at different spatial positions. Even
if a priori of a different kind than locality, this remarkable feature provides the additional
structure needed to carry out our analysis.
    The subsections below formally describe these ingredients so that they can be used as
black boxes in Part B, and proved in later parts.

4.2   Ingredient 1: Rotation invariance
The following result serves as a key external input for the paper. It states that k-point
correlations functions are invariant under rotations in the limit as δ tends to zero.
                                                                               √
Theorem 4.1 (Rotation invariance of k-point correlations [Ave+a]). Fix 3 ≤ c ≤ 2.
Then, for any k ∈ 2Z≥1 and any compact set K ⊂ Dk ,
                                           (δ)        (δ)
                           lim sup sup Φk (u) − Φk (Iu) = 0,                              (24)
                           δ→0 u∈K   I

where the second supremum is taken over all isometries I : R2 → R2 .
                                               √
    This is the origin of the restriction c ≥ 3. Indeed, [Dum+20] proves asymptotic
rotational invariance for the critical random-cluster model with cluster weight q ∈ [1, 4].
Through the Baxter–Kelland–Wu
                 √                (BKW) correspondence [BKW76], this range of q matches
the regime c ∈ [ 3, 2] of the six-vertex model. In [Ave+a], this correspondence is used to
transfer the asymptotic rotational invariance from the critical random-cluster model to the
six-vertex height function.
    We expect Theorem 4.1 to hold for all c ∈ (0, 2]. For c ∈ [1, 2], we believe that there
may exist a proof following [Dum+20], but working directly with the six-vertex model
rather than its FK-percolation representation. The arguments of the present paper would
extend verbatim to c ∈ [1, 2] if Theorem 4.1 were available in that parameter range.
    For c < 1, although convergence to the GFF is still expected, the six-vertex model lacks
positive association, and several steps of the proof (related to Ingredient 3) fail (in their
present form) without this positive association.

4.3   Ingredient 2: A glimpse of scale invariance
It may be natural to expect that, in addition to rotational invariance, scale invariance is an
important ingredient in identifying the scaling limit. While having such a property would
simplify considerably our argument, it seems currently out of reach of direct techniques.
Still, a glimpse of scale invariance is provided by the fact that the free energy or surface
tension of the six-vertex model with a slope is twice differentiable at zero slope. Indeed, its
second derivative will be identified as the limit of a certain quantity as the scale δ tends to
zero. The convergence of said quantity will act as our indicator of scale invariance.

                                                 15
    Below, we make the previous claim explicit. Let us start by recalling the definition of
the free energy.

Definition 4.2 (Free energy). Fix c > 0. Define the free energy at slope s ∈ [−1, 1] via

                                1                 hn
                                                           ⌊Ls/2⌋
                                                                  oi
               f (s) = lim     lim log ZTM,L PTM,L     I
                                                      ML =  L/2       ,                (25)
                      L→∞ M →∞ M L

where I is the number of left arrows minus the number of right arrows on any given vertical
column of horizontal edges.

    While the height function may not be defined for unbalanced six-vertex configurations
on the torus, I/M L should be interpreted as its average slope in the vertical direction.
Note that f : [−1, 1] → R is an even function thanks to the symmetry by flipping all arrows.
    Twice differentiability of the free energy was proved in [Dum+22] for the six-vertex
model with c ∈ (0, 2] using Bethe Ansatz techniques. It was used in [Dum+24] to
prove the delocalisation of the zero-slope six-vertex model for c ∈ [1, 2]. By further
harnessing [Dum+22], we explicitly compute the second derivative of f at 0 – see Section 24
for c ∈ [1, 2].
    We use this result as a starting point for a two-step analysis, summarised in the
following two results. The first step shows that the second derivative is indeed related to
scale invariance of our actual six-vertex model: it determines the amplitude of the GFF
limit (assuming such a limit exists). In the second step, we turn the characterisation of
[Dum+22] into an explicit computation.

Theorem 4.3 (GFF-LDP correspondence). Fix c ∈ [1, 2]. Assume that the six-vertex
model has a sub-sequential scaling limit of the form σ · GFF. Then,
                                                     1
                                         σ2 = −              .                         (26)
                                                  f ′′ (0)

Theorem 4.4 (Computation of f ′′ (0)). Fix c ∈ [1, 2]. Then, f is symmetric and twice
differentiable at s = 0, with

                             f ′′ (0) = − 21 arccos ∆ = − arcsin(c/2),                 (27)

where the relation between c and ∆ is given in Equation (5).

    Jointly, the two theorems prove that any sub-sequential scaling limit that is a multiple
of the GFF must have the explicitly computed variance.
    Let us briefly comment on Theorem 4.3. The formula σ 2 = −1/f ′′ (0) would boil down
to a “back of the envelope” calculation if the topology of the sub-sequential convergence
towards σ GFF were strong enough to include convergence of probabilities of large deviation
events. Unfortunately, the topology is not compatible with events whose probability decays
exponentially fast to zero, and we must therefore obtain the formula by different means.
We shall derive the formula by essentially expressing the probability of a large deviation
event as the product of many probabilities of GFF events that are compatible with the
topology of the sub-sequential convergence.

4.4   Ingredient 3: Regularity estimates and qualitative behaviour
The recently developed Russo–Seymour–Welsh (RSW) theory for the six-vertex model
implies a circuit estimate for a suitable percolation representation of the model. This

                                                16
RSW theory was first developed in [Dum+24] using the Bethe Ansatz. The representation
employed here first appeared in [Lis21; Lis22]. The corresponding circuit estimate follows
from [Dum+24] and was later obtained independently in [GL25] through a different approach
not relying on the Bethe Ansatz. We will later return to these aspects in more detail.
    For the purpose of this introduction, we adopt the following principle: this paragraph
records the consequences of the representation and the circuit estimate without describing
the representation of the circuit estimate explicitly, so that they may be treated as black
boxes in Part B. All statements below will be proved in Part D.
    First, define the scale separation functions for any {a, a′ }, {b, b′ } ⊂ R2 :

                                                         dist({a, a′ }, {b, b′ })
                      SR2 ({a, a′ }, {b, b′ }) := log                              ;           (28)
                                                        min{|a′ − a|, |b′ − b|}
                                                        1 ∨ dist({a, a′ }, {b, b′ })
                      SR′ 2 ({a, a′ }, {b, b′ }) := log                              .         (29)
                                                         min{|a′ − a|, |b′ − b|}

Recall that | · | denotes Euclidean distance in these formulas; dist denotes the Euclidean
distance between the two sets (that is, the minimum distance between any point in the
first set and any point in the second set). The first function is truly invariant under scaling;
the second function is more adapted to the discrete setting as it allows the pairs of points
to overlap.
     The following estimate bears a resemblance to Equation (14) and forms the basis of our
qualitative analysis of correlation functions.

Theorem 4.5 (Regularity estimate). For any k ∈ 2Z≥1 , there exist constants αk > 0 and
Ck < ∞ such that for any c ∈ [1, 2] and u ∈ (Z2 )2k ,

                X Y e−αk SR2 ({ui ,u′i },{uj ,u′j })
                      (
                                                         if SR2 ({ui , u′i }, {uj , u′j }) ≥ 20k 2 ,
  |Φk (u)| ≤ Ck                ′          ′          ′                   ′            ′          2
                π ij∈π 1 ∨ −SR2 ({ui , ui }, {uj , uj }) if SR2 ({ui , ui }, {uj , uj }) < 20k ,
                                                                                               (30)

where π runs over pairings of {1, . . . , k}.

   The previous theorem has the following important corollary, which follows immediately
from the additivity property in Equation (10).

Corollary 4.6 (Precompactness of correlation functions). Fix c ∈ [1, 2] and k ∈ 2Z≥1 . Let
(δn ) denote any sequence tending to zero. Then the following two are equivalent:
         (δ )
   (i) Φk n converges to Ψk pointwise on a countable dense subset of Dk ;
         (δ )
  (ii) Φk n converges to Ψk uniformly on compact subsets of Dk .
                                    (δ )
In this case, we say simply that Φk n converges to Ψk on Dk .
                       (δ)                                             (δ)
     Moreover, supδ |Φk | is finite on Dk , and therefore the family (Φk )δ is precompact in
this topology. Finally, any sub-sequential limit is continuous on Dk .

Proof. The proof follows by carefully manipulating the regularity estimate (Theorem 4.5),
the definition of the scale separation functions (Equations (28) and (29)), and additivity
(Equation (10)).
   We first claim that, for any neighbourhood N ⊂ Dk of some compact set K ⊂ Dk , we
may find some δ0 > 0 such that
                                                   (δ)
                                     sup         |Φk (v)| ≤ sup B(u)                           (31)
                                v∈K, δ∈(0,δ0 )                u∈N


                                                     17
where B(u) is defined as
          X Y e−αk SR2 ({ui ,u′i },{uj ,u′j })
                  (
                                                   if SR2 ({ui , u′i }, {uj , u′j }) ≥ 20k 2 ,
       Ck                                                                                           (32)
          π ij∈π 1 ∨ −SR2 ({ui , ui }, {uj , uj }) if SR2 ({ui , ui }, {uj , uj }) < 20k .
                                    ′          ′                   ′            ′          2


This claim is convenient: it does not take into account the integer restriction in Theorem 4.5,
and it does not involve the function SR′ 2 .
    To prove the claim, we first want to find a δ0 > 0 such that:
    • For any v ∈ K and δ ∈ (0, δ0 ), the point ⌊v/δ⌋ ∈ (Z2 )2k with all coordinates rounded
      down still lies in (δ −1 )N ⊂ Dk ,
    • For any δ ∈ (0, δ0 ) and u ∈ (δ −1 )N , Equations (28) and (29) coincide for any i ̸= j.
The first item holds true by basic topological considerations. For the second item, it is
easy to see that (28) and (29) coincide on (δ −1 )N for small enough δ by compactness of N ,
simply because dist({ui /δ, u′i /δ}, {uj /δ, u′j /δ}) ≥ 1.
    It is easy to derive the claim from the two above items. Notice that B inherits scale-
invariance from SR2 , and therefore the left side of (31) is bounded by supu∈N , δ∈(0,δ0 ) B(u/δ) =
supu∈N B(u). This proves the claim (Equation (31)). We will now derive the statements
in the corollary from this claim.
                                                     (δ)
    First, it follows immediately that supδ |Φk | is bounded on Dk . For the other two
statements (locally uniform convergence towards a continuous function), it suffices to prove
that for any point u ∈ Dk and ε > 0, there exists a neighbourhood N ⊂ Dk of u and some
δ0 > 0 such that
                                               (δ)         (δ)
                                  sup      |Φk (u) − Φk (v)| ≤ ε.                             (33)
                                v∈N , δ∈(0,δ0 )

This difference can be written as a telescopic sum of 2k terms, where each term is of the
        (δ)       (δ)
form Φk (v ′ ) − Φk (v ′′ ) for some v ′ and v ′′ that differ in only one entry. In that case,
we can apply additivity (Equation (10)) to write this difference as a single correlation
            (δ)
function Φk (w) where w has the property that two points are very close (since N is
a tiny neighbourhood of u) and the other points are fixed. Equation (31) then tells us
       (δ)
that Φk (w) can be made as small as desired by shrinking N . This implies the desired
statement.

    The following cylinder estimates are straightforward adaptations of Theorem 4.5. Below,
ΦCylL ,2 is the two-point correlation function on the cylinder Z × (Z/LZ), see Subsection 4.5
below for details.
Corollary 4.7 (Regularity estimate for the cylinder). There exist constants C, c ∈ (0, ∞)
such that for every c ∈ [1, 2], L ∈ 2Z≥1 and k ∈ Z≥1 ,
     |ΦCylL ,2 ((0, 0), (k, 0), (2k, 0), (3k, 0))| ≤ C,                                             (34)
         |ΦCylL ,2 ((0, 0), (0, ℓ), (k, 0), (k, ℓ))| ≤ C(ℓ/k)  c
                                                                   for 0 < ℓ ≤ min{8k, L/2}.        (35)
    A more subtle manifestation of the RSW theory takes the form of a mixing estimate. It
is standard that RSW estimates induce polynomial mixing estimates between scales. Here,
we state a non-optimised version in terms of the multi-point correlation functions.
Theorem 4.8 (Mixing estimate). Fix c ∈ [1, 2], k ∈ 2Z≥1 . In this theorem, we consider
u = (u(1) , u(2) ) ∈ Dk with u(1) = (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u′2 ) and u(2) = (u3 , . . . u′k ); we consider each
of the 2k points fixed, except for the first point u1 which is variable. Then there exists some
constant C = C(u′1 , u2 , u′2 , . . .) < ∞ such that
                                           (δ)           (δ)       (δ)
                      lim sup lim sup Φk (u) − Φ2 (u(1) )Φk−2 (u(2) ) ≤ C.                          (36)
                      u1 →u2     δ→0


                                                    18
    Next, we state two intermediate results which are useful in Part E, where we identify
the variance of the limiting GFF. These intermediate results are stated in terms of (random)
subsets of F (Z2 ). We endow such subsets with nearest-neighbour connectivity: faces are
neighbours if and only if they share an edge. We identify a path of such faces with the
union of the line segments connecting the centres of the faces, so that we may view such
paths as subsets of R2 .

Theorem 4.9 (Arm exponents). Fix c ∈ [1, 2]. There exists a constant c > 0 such that for
any k ∈ Z≥0 and R, r ∈ Z≥4 satisfying R ≥ 2r,
                                                                           
                 ∃a ∈ 2Z such that the two sets of faces {h + a ≤ 0} and                   2
      PZ2                                                                         ≤ (r/R)ck .   (37)
                 {h + a ≥ k} both contain paths from [−r, r]2 to ∂[−R, R]2

    The last intermediate results follows directly from the representation (and not the
RSW theory). Informally, flip domination says that if h is below some fixed m ∈ 2Z on a
closed circuit of faces, then, on the faces surrounded by this circuit, h − m is stochastically
dominated by m − h. The formal statement is slightly more involved, owing to the gradient
nature of the six-vertex height function.

Theorem 4.10 (Flip domination). Fix c ∈ [1, 2]. Consider the following setup:
    • γ is an arbitrary self-avoiding F (Z2 )-circuit,
    • Fγ ⊂ F (Z2 ) denotes the faces strictly surrounded by γ (not those visited by γ),
    • m ∈ 2Z denotes the maximum of 2⌈ 21 h|Fγ ⌉, so that h − m is gradient measurable,
    • E is any gradient event measurable in terms of h|F (Z2 )\Fγ with positive probability.
Then, for the measure PZ2 [ · |E], the height function (h − m)|Fγ is stochastically dominated
by (m − h)|Fγ . More precisely, for any bounded increasing function X, we have

                                                                                                (38)
                                                                  
                          EZ2 X((h − m)|Fγ ) E ≤ EZ2 X((m − h)|Fγ ) E .


4.5     Ingredient 4: Spectral representation of correlation functions
The purpose of the next few paragraphs is to state a spectral representation (which is a
consequence of the transfer matrix formalism) as it is used in the core of the proof, without
going into detail on how it is obtained. The spectral representation does not rely on the
Yang–Baxter equations or the Bethe Ansatz. We start with a definition of the six-vertex
model on the cylinder.


4.5.1       Six-vertex model on the cylinder

The transfer matrix can be used to derive identities in the six-vertex model on a cylinder.
Recall that PTM,L is the six-vertex measure on the torus TM,L . For L even, let CylL denote
the graph on the vertex set Z × (Z/LZ) with nearest-neighbour connectivity. The definition
of a balanced six-vertex configuration extends to the cylinder: a six-vertex configuration
is called balanced if, in each column of horizontal edges, there are exactly L/2 arrows
pointing to the right and L/2 arrows pointing to the left. The event of balanced six-vertex
configurations is denoted {balanced} like before. The following lemma forms the starting
point of our spectral representation (it is proved later on in Equation (195)).

Lemma 4.11 (Cylinder measure). Fix c > 0. The weak limit of PTM,L [ · |{balanced}] as
M → ∞ exists and is denoted PCylL .

                                                  19
    Recall that Theorem 2.2 implies that when c ∈ [1, 2], PCylL converges weakly to PZ2 as
L tends to infinity.
    Balanced six-vertex configurations ω on CylL are in bijection with gradient height
functions h : F (CylL ) → Z. To see that this is true, we remark that any oriented loop
on the dual graph of CylL intersects the same number of left- and right-pointing arrows
(relative to the orientation of the loop), thanks to the ice rule and the balanced condition.
We may extend the domain of such gradient height functions to R×(R/LZ) (via an analogue
of Equation (7)) and to R2 by a simple lift.
    Recall Definition 2.4. For any u = (u1 , u′1 , . . . , uk , u′k ) ∈ (R2 )2k , we shall write
                                                    " k                             #
                                                     Y
                                                              h(u′i ) − h(ui )                       (39)
                                                                                
                          ΦCylL ,k (u) =:= ECylL                                        .
                                                        i=1


4.5.2    Spectral representation of the two-point function
Let us introduce some more notation. For u = (u1 , u′1 , . . . , u2k , u′2k ) ∈ (R2 )2k , define xi , yi ,
x′i , and yi′ such that

                       u′i − ui = (xi , yi )    and           ui+1 − u′i = (x′i , yi′ ).             (40)

We say that a sequence (u1 , u′1 , . . . , u2k , u′2k ) is horizontally ordered whenever xi , x′i ≥ 0 for
all i, and horizontally strictly ordered whenever xi ≥ 0 and x′i > 0 for all i.

Theorem 4.12 (Spectral representation of the two-point function). Fix c > 0 and L ∈ 2Z>0 .
Then, there exists a finite positive measure µL on R>0 × R such that
                Z                                                          
                                                 ′      ′
 ΦCylL ,2 (u) =     (1 − a)x2 e−iby2 − 1 (1 − a)x1 e−iby1 1 − (1 − a)x1 e−iby1 dµL (a, b) (41)

for any horizontally ordered u = (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u′2 ) ⊂ Z2 , and which is supported on the set
(0, 2] × [−π, π] and invariant under the map (a, b) 7→ (a, −b). Furthermore, µL ({|b| ∈
(0, 2π/L)}) = 0.

    The measure µL is called positive to distinguish it from signed or complex measures.
We shall later see that µL is a finite sum of Dirac masses induced by the spectrum of
the transfer matrix of the six-vertex model. The measure is therefore referred to as a
spectral measure. The heart of the proof of our main theorem will be to study the full-plane
two-point function Φ2 via an appropriate limit (as L tends to infinity) of the measures µL .

4.5.3    Spectral representation of general observables
We shall derive an expression for general observables similar to (41), but less explicit. At the
heart of this expression is a crucial symmetry under reflection and the associated reflection
positivity.
    To describe it, let R := { 12 } × R ⊂ R2 denote the reflection line. The definition is
chosen such that R traverses face centres (and not vertices). Let † : R2 → R2 denote the
reflection with respect to R. Let F − (CylL ) denote the cylinder faces on the left of R, and
let F + (CylL ) denote the cylinder faces on the right of R; the faces whose centres lie on R
are included in both sets. The function † is also interpreted as an involution on F (CylL ),
and acts on height functions via h† := h ◦ †.

Remark 4.13. It is important that † is applied to the height function, not the arrows.

                                                   20
    Let A denote the set of local observables, that is, real-valued random variables X which
are measurable in terms of the restriction of the gradient of h to finitely many faces (such
observables are necessarily bounded). Let

                   A± := {X ∈ A : X is measurable in terms of h|F ± (CylL ) }.                        (42)

Notice that the reflection † may be interpreted as a bijection from A− to A+ , via

                                            X† : h 7→ X(h† ).                                         (43)

Finally, for any v ∈ Z≥0 × Z, define the (translation) map τv : Z2 → Z2 , u 7→ u + v, which
is extended to A+ via

                               τv : A+ → A+ , X 7→ (h 7→ X(h ◦ τv )).                                 (44)

Remark 4.14. To better grasp the definition, consider the following example.                           Let
(u1 , u′1 , . . . , uk , u′k ) ⊂ (Z≥0 + 12 ) × (Z + 12 ) denote a family of centres of faces in F + (CylL ).
Then:
     • The observable X defined via X : h 7→ i (h(u′i ) − h(ui )) belongs              to A+ ,
                                                           Q
     • For any v ∈ Z≥0 × Z, we have τv (X) ∈ A with τv (X)(h) = i (h(u′i + v) − h(ui + v)),
                                                            +
                                                                                Q

     • We have X† ∈ A− with X† (h) = i (h((u′i )† ) − h(u†i )).
                                                   Q

    We now state the main theorem about the spectral representation of general observables.
Theorem 4.15 (Spectral representation of general observables). Fix c > 0. For any triple
(X, Y, L) ∈ A− × A+ × 2Z≥1 , there exists a finite complex-valued measure µX,Y,L supported
on [0, 2) such that:
  (i) For any k ≥ 0,                             Z
                              ECylL [X · τ(k,0) (Y)] =     (1 − a)k dµX,Y,L (a),                      (45)

 (ii) (Cauchy–Schwarz inequality) µX,X† ,L and µY† ,Y,L are positive measures and

        |ECylL [XY]|2 ≤ ∥µX,Y,L ∥2 ≤ ∥µX,X† ,L ∥ · ∥µY† ,Y,L ∥ = ECylL [XX† ]ECylL [Y† Y] (46)

       where ∥ · ∥ denotes the total variation metric.
   Note that (45) holds true and is non-trivial for k = 0. The second property can be
understood as a reflection positivity property, see e.g. [Bis09] and references therein.


5     Organisation of the paper
The paper is organised into four parts, according to Table 2. Recall from Section 4 that
Part B contains the main proofs and depends on all of the four ingredients. The other parts
are independent of one another, except that Ingredient 2 (Part E) relies on some ideas
developed in Ingredient 3 (Part D). Ingredient 1 (the rotational invariance of Theorem 4.1)
was proved in prior work, and no part is dedicated to it.


Part B
Proof of the main results
This part implements the main proofs as outlined in Section 4. The ingredients stated
formally in the introduction are used as external inputs. The main results of Sections 6,

                                                    21
      Part     Content                           Techniques             External inputs
      B        Main proofs                       measure theory;        Ingredients 1–4
               (Theorems 2.8 and 3.3)            complex analysis
      C        Ingredient 4                      elementary;
               Spectral representation           linear algebra
      D        Ingredient 3                      percolation            [Dum+24] (or [GL25])
               Regularity estimates
      E        Ingredient 2                      percolation;           [Dum+22]
               Glimpse of scale invariance       complex analysis       and Ingredient 3

 Table 2: Organisation of the paper: content, techniques, and dependencies of each part.


7, and 8 are Theorems 6.1, 7.1, and 8.1, respectively, and they correspond to Steps 1–3
outlined in Section 4. Sections 6–8 may be read independently of one another. Section 9
then combines these results to prove the main result in the isotropic case (Theorem√2.8).
Section 10 presents the proof of the anisotropic case (Theorem 3.3). The value of c ∈ [ 3, 2]
does not play a role in the proofs and is omitted from notations.


6     Sub-sequential GFF limits for the two-point function
6.1    Statement of the theorem and outline of the proof
Section 6 is dedicated to proving the following result.

Theorem 6.1 (Dichotomy for the two-point function). One of the following two properties
holds true:
                                              (δ)
    • There exists some σ ∈ R≥0 such that Φ2 converges to σ 2 ΨGFF  2     uniformly on every
      compact subset of D2 as δ tends to zero,
    • There exist two distinct σ, σ ′ ∈ R≥0 and two sequences (δn )n , (δn′ )n tending to zero
                 (δ )       (δ ′ )
      such that Φ2 n and Φ2 n converge to σ 2 ΨGFF2  and (σ ′ )2 ΨGFF
                                                                  2   respectively, uniformly
      on every compact subset of D2 as n tends to infinity.

Remark 6.2. The theorem does not assert that all sub-sequential limits are multiples of
ΨGFF
  2   . We believe that its proof allows for the possibility of other sub-sequential scaling
limits, such as, for example, σ 2 ΨGFF
                                   2    + (σ ′ )2 Ψ′2 , where Ψ′ is the two-point correlation
function of a massive GFF.

    Let us sketch the proof. The first step (Subsection 6.2) consists in taking the limit
as L tends to infinity and taking a scaling limit along a sub-sequence in the spectral
representation formula from Theorem 4.12 for the two-point correlation function of the
six-vertex model on the cylinder. By compactness arguments, this yields a limiting two-point
function Ψ2 and a positive measure µ on R>0 × R, invariant under (a, b) 7→ (a, −b), such
that for every u = (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u′2 ) ∈ (R2 )4 satisfying some simple geometric constraints,
                       Z                                                 
                                                       ′    ′
             Ψ2 (u) =         e−ax2 −iby2 − 1 e−ax1 −iby1 1 − e−ax1 −iby1 dµ(a, b)            (47)

(recall Equation (40) for a definition of (x1 , y1 , x′1 , y1′ , x2 , y2 ) associated with such a u). The
measure µ fully encodes the two-point function Ψ2 , and our aim is to analyse its structure.

                                                   22
    Assuming we may differentiate under the integral, applying the Laplacian at any
argument of Ψ2 produces a factor a2 + (ib)2 in the integrand, which hints that harmonicity
of Ψ2 in each argument on D2 is equivalent to the concentration property µ[{b2 ̸= a2 }] = 0.
In fact, it is a simple exercise (see also the proof of Theorem 9.1) to check from the
expression above that Ψ2 = σ 2 · ΨGFF  2    for some σ > 0 if and only if µ[{b2 ̸= a2 }] = 0 and
                                              σ2
the density of the first marginal of µ is 2πa    da.
    We will not be able to establish these two properties of µ directly. The key ingredient
we do exploit, however, is the rotational invariance of Ψ2 (Theorem 4.1), which provides a
collection of identities relating values of Ψ2 at different points. These identities translate into
constraints on the joint distribution of a and b under µ – see (78) and (87). By combining
them with certain analyticity properties (of the function IF defined in Subsection 6.3), we
will derive in Subsection 6.4 that

                                        µ[{a2 < b2 }] = 0.                                      (48)

    One might hope that Theorem 4.1 would also yield the opposite bound µ[{a2 > b2 }] = 0,
thereby implying µ[{b2 ̸= a2 }] = 0. The density of the first marginal would then follow
readily from the rotational invariance constraints, thus determining µ up to multiplicative
constant. Unfortunately this is not the case: as pointed out in Remark 6.2, one may
construct an entire family of scaling limits consistent with rotational invariance and all
regularity assumptions, but for which µ[{b2 ̸= a2 }] ̸= 0.
    Although (48) is insufficient to uniquely determine Ψ2 , it is nonetheless enough to show
(see Subsection 6.5) that the large-scale and small-scale behaviour of Ψ2 is compatible with
that of two-point correlation functions of the GFF. In particular, if Ψ2 is not a multiple
of ΨGFF
     2   , then its sub-sequential scaling limits at large and small scales must be distinct
multiples of ΨGFF
               2    . This yields the dichotomy of Theorem 6.1.

6.2     Compactness of the spectral representation
Here and below, we keep the convention from Equation (40) for (x1 , y1 , x′1 , y1′ , x2 , y2 )
introduced in the introduction for every horizontally ordered u. Recall from Theorem 4.12
that                                     Z
                           ΦCylL ,2 (u) = χdiscr
                                              u  (a, b)dµL (a, b)                       (49)

where
                                                                                         
                                    x2 −iby2               x′1 −iby1′              x1 −iby1
         χdiscr
          u     (a, b) :=   (1 − a)   e      − 1   (1 − a)    e         1 − (1 − a)  e          (50)

for any horizontally ordered u = (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u′2 ) ∈ (Z2 )4 . This subsection proves that the
family (µL )L belongs to a compact space of measures, which allows us to derive a spectral
representation for the sub-sequential scaling limit of the two-point function.

6.2.1    A compact space of measures
In this section, we introduce a compact space M of measures satisfying some scale-invariant
qualitative bounds, and then show that the cylinder measures µL belong to this space.

Definition 6.3 (The compact space Mc,C ). For c, C ∈ (0, ∞), let Mc,C denote the set
of positive measures ν on R>0 × R, invariant under (a, b) 7→ (a, −b) and satisfying the
following bounds:
   (i) ν[{a ∈ (α, 2α)}] ≤ C, for any α > 0,

                                                 23
 (ii) ν[{(a, |b|) ∈ (0, α) × (β, 2β)}] ≤ C(α/β)c , for any β ≥ α > 0.
We endow Mc,C with the weak (or vague) topology, that is, the topology making the map
ν 7→ ν[f ] continuous for any continuous function f : R>0 × R → C whose support is a
compact subset of R>0 × R.

    We now show that the cylinder measures µL belong to Mc,C for suitable constants
c, C ∈ (0, ∞).

Lemma 6.4. There exist constants c, C ∈ (0, ∞) such that, for every L, the measure µL
belongs to Mc,C .

  From this point on, we fix such a pair c, C ∈ (0, ∞) once and for all, and we write
M := Mc,C in what follows.

Proof. Reflection symmetry suggests that some u ∈ (Z2 )4 are special: namely those u
where the first two points are chosen on the left of some vertical reflection line, and where
the last two points are the reflections of the first two points. This leads to χdiscr
                                                                                u     being real
and of constant sign, which is crucial for the proof. We shall fix L throughout.

Step 1: Checking (i) in the definition of M. For k ∈ Z≥0 and ℓ ∈ 2Z≥0 , set
                                                           
                                    u1         0            0
                                  u′1     k              0
                                u=
                                  u2  :=  k + ℓ
                                                                                        (51)
                                                            0
                                    u′2     2k + ℓ          0

so that
                         χdiscr
                          u     (a, b) = −(1 − a)ℓ (1 − (1 − a)k )2 ≤ 0.                   (52)
   We now split the argument in two cases depending on the value of α. First, consider
the case α ≤ 1/16. Let k = ℓ ∈ [ 8α     1     1
                                           , 4α ] ∩ 2Z. Then, for any (a, b) ∈ [α, 2α] × R, a
short computation gives that |χu (a, b)| ≥ 1/1000. Also, Corollary 4.7 implies that
                                  discr

|ΦCylL ,2 (u)| ≤ C uniformly in L and α. Combining the claims of the two last sentences
and χdiscr
      u     (a, b) < 0 leads to
                                Z
    µL [{a ∈ [α, 2α]}] ≤ −1000 χdiscr
                                    u     (a, b)dµL (a, b) = 1000|ΦCylL ,2 (u)| ≤ 1000C. (53)

For the case α ≥ 1/16, simply set k = 1 and ℓ = 0 and use a similar strategy to get

                       µL [{a ∈ [1/16, ∞)}] ≤ 256|ΦCylL ,2 (u)| ≤ 256.                     (54)

On the right we used that height differences are bounded by 1, and thus |ΦCylL ,2 (u)| ≤ 1.

Step 2: Checking (ii) in the definition of M. We will prove the existence of constants
c, C > 0 such that
                                                       c
           µL [{(a, |b|) ∈ (0, α) × (β, 2β)}] ≤ C αβ         for α < 16
                                                                     1
                                                                        and β = 2ℓ
                                                                                π
                                                                                           (55)

with 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ L/2 integer. Condition (ii) may be deduced from (55), together with point (i)
above and the fact that µL is supported on {(a, b) : 0 < a ≤ 2 and 2π/L ≤ |b| ≤ π} (see
Theorem 4.12), by simple algebraic manipulations.

                                               24
   Fix values of α and β as in (55) and choose some even integer k ∈ [ 8α
                                                                        1    1
                                                                          , 4α ]. Set
                                                            
                                      u1        0            0
                                     u′1    0             ℓ
                                     u2  := k
                                   u=                                                   (56)
                                                             0
                                      u′2      k             ℓ

so that x1 = x2 = 0 and x′1 = k and

                           χdiscr
                            u     (a, b) = 2(1 − a)k (1 − cos ℓb) ≥ 0.                      (57)

Then, for any (a, b) ∈ [0, α] × [β, 2β], a short computation gives that χdiscr
                                                                          u     (a, b) ≥ 1. Also,
                                                      ′
Corollary 4.7 implies that |ΦCylL ,2 (u)| ≤ C ′ (α/β)c for some constants C ′ , c′ ∈ (0, ∞) that
are uniform in L, α, and β. The conclusion follows by the same argument as in point (i).

    We now start manipulating the measures in M. By construction, these measures have
the property that                 Z
                                 sup     (a ∧ a1 )dν(a, b) < ∞.                             (58)
                                 ν∈M

This means that the function a∧ a1 is a good domination function for applying the dominated
convergence theorem. In the following lemma, we collect a few more properties of M. We
leave it as a straightforward exercise to the reader.

Lemma 6.5 (Properties of M). We have the following properties:
  (i) M is a compact topological space,
 (ii) Suppose that f : R>0 × R → C is a continuous function such that

                                       sup(a ∨ a1 )|f (a, b)| < ∞,                          (59)
                                       a,b

      then the function M → C, ν 7→ ν[f ] is continuous,
(iii) Let (νn )n ⊂ M denote a sequence of measures, and let (fn )n denote a sequence
      of continuous functions fn : R>0 × R → C such that supn,a,b (a ∨ a1 )|fn (a, b)| < ∞.
      If (νn )n converges to ν and (fn )n converges uniformly on every compact subset of
      R>0 × R to a function f , then

                                             lim νn [fn ] → ν[f ].                          (60)
                                         n→∞


6.2.2   Passage to the full-plane limit of cylinder measures
In this section, we analyse the limit of the cylinder measures as L tends to infinity. Since
the measures µL belong to M, we may fix, once and for all, a sub-sequential limit µ∞ ∈ M
of the sequence (µL )L . The full sequence (µL )L may actually be shown to converge — for
instance using (61) and the uniqueness of of the L → ∞ limit of the two-point function
stemming from the existence of the full-plane measure — but this fact will not play a role
in what follows. Therefore we simply work with a fixed sub-sequential limit.
    The full-plane two-point correlation function may then be expressed in terms of µ∞ as
in the case of the cylinder.

Lemma 6.6. For any horizontally ordered sequence u ⊂ Z2 with {y1 , y2 } ∋ 0, we have
                                  Z
                        Φ2 (u) = χdiscr
                                      u   (a, b) dµ∞ (a, b).                       (61)


                                                  25
Proof. Suppose that u satisfies the assumptions of the lemma. Using the full-plane limit of
the six-vertex model (Theorem 2.2), we obtain

                                                        (49)
                           Φ2 (u) = lim ΦCylL ,2 (u) = lim µL [χdiscr
                                                                u     ].                            (62)
                                     L→∞                       L→∞

Since µL is supported on (0, 2] × R, we may insert the indicator 1[a ≤ 2] and write

                                 Φ2 (u) = lim µL [1[a ≤ 2] · χdiscr
                                                              u     ].                              (63)
                                           L→∞


Because y1 = 0 or y2 = 0, we have 1[a ≤ 2] · χdiscr
                                              u     = O(a ∧ a1 ) (see Equation (50)).
Lemma 6.5 therefore implies that

                                   Φ2 (u) = µ∞ [1[a ≤ 2] · χdiscr
                                                            u     ].                                (64)

The proof is completed by discarding the indicator 1[a ≤ 2], which is justified by the fact
that µ∞ [|a| > 2] = 0. This property is inherited from the corresponding bound for the
measures µL , by the definition of M and a second application of Lemma 6.5.




Figure 3: The spectral representation passes to the scaling limit when the points u ∈
(R2 )4 satisfies the geometric constraints of the figure: the pairs of points cannot overlap
“horizontally” (in the figure, x1 ≥ 0 and x′1 > 0), and one pair must line on a horizontal
line (in the figure, y2 = 0).



6.2.3    Passage to the scaling limit
We now pass to the scaling limit by letting the mesh size of the lattice tend to zero. For
any ν ∈ M and δ > 0, denote by ν (δ) ∈ M the measure defined by

                                          ν (δ) (U ) := ν(δU )                                      (65)

for any measurable subset U ⊂ R>0 × R. By construction, for every integrable function f ,
                       Z                        Z
                                       (δ)
                          f (δa, δb) dν (a, b) = f (a, b) dν(a, b).                 (66)


    For u = (x, y) ∈ R2 , set u/δ := (⌊x/δ⌋, ⌊y/δ⌋) ∈ Z2 , and for any u = (u1 , u′1 , . . . , uk , u′k ) ∈
(R2 )2k for some k, write u/δ := (u1 /δ, u′1 /δ, . . . , uk /δ, u′k /δ) ⊂ (Z2 )2k .
    The following notion will be used throughout.

Definition 6.7 (Convergence sequence). A convergence sequence is a sequence of positive
                                        (δ )
reals (δn )n tending to zero such that µ∞n converges in the compact topological space M.
We denote by µ its limit. The dependence on (δn )n will always be clear from context.

                                                   26
    Convergence sequences exist by compactness of M. Moreover, from any sequence of
scales (δn′ )n tending to zero, one may extract a convergence sub-sequence (δn )n .
    To state the next result, we introduce a variant χ of the function χdiscr from Equa-
tion (50): for any u = (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u′2 ) ⊂ R2 , define
                                                           ′   ′
                    χu (a, b) := (e−ax2 −iby2 − 1)e−ax1 −iby1 (1 − e−ax1 −iby1 ).               (67)

Lemma 6.8 (Spectral representation of the sub-sequential scaling limit). Let (δn )n be a
convergence sequence. Then, for any horizontally strictly ordered u = (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u′2 ) ∈ (R2 )4
satisfying {y1 , y2 } ∋ 0
                                                  Z
                                         (δn )
                          Ψ2 (u) := lim Φ2 (u) = χu (a, b) dµ(a, b).                            (68)
                                   n→∞

Remark 6.9. Compared to (61), we require above that the points be horizontally strictly
ordered. This additional strictness is necessary because, under scaling, one must also control
the behaviour of χu for large values of a, and this geometric requirement is precisely what
ensures that such behaviour is properly handled.

Proof. For notational simplicity we assume that the points u belong to (Z2 )2k ⊂ (R2 )2k ,
that 1/δn ∈ Z for all n, and that y2 = 0. Since u is horizontally strictly ordered and due to
the smoothness of u 7→ χu (a, b), the bounds in the definition of M and the Hölder nature
of the correlators, these assumptions are harmless.
    The proof would be easy if µ∞ was supported on {a ≤ 1} (meaning that all eigenvalues
of the transfer matrix were non-negative). The negative eigenvalues, corresponding to
a ∈ (1, 2], make the proof slightly more technical.
                       (δ )
    For any n, split Φ2 n (u) = Pn + Nn depending on the contributions of positive and
negative eigenvalues respectively:
                                   Z
                            Pn :=         χdiscr
                                           u/δn (a, b) dµ∞ (a, b);                       (69)
                                    {a≤1}
                                   Z
                            Nn :=           χdiscr
                                              u/δn (a, b) dµ∞ (a, b).                    (70)
                                      {1<a≤2}

To conclude, it suffices to show that Pn tends to          χu (a, b)dµ(a, b) (as n → ∞), and Nn to
                                                       R

zero.

Step 1: Limit of Nn . Recall from the definition of M that µ∞ [{1 < a ≤ 2}] < ∞. By
writing out χdiscr
             u/δn explicitly, it is easy to see that

                                                               ′
                                  |χdiscr
                                    u/δn (a, b)| ≤ 4(1 − a)
                                                            x1 /δn
                                                                   .                            (71)

For any fixed a ∈ (1, 2), the bound on the right converges to zero as n tends to infinity.
Thus, using the dominated convergence theorem, the only contribution to the limit can
come from an atom at a = 2. However, µ∞ [{a = 2}] = 0. Indeed, writing e1 = (1, 0), one
has, as k tends to infinity over the odd integers,
                                               Z
        Φ2 (0, e1 , (k + 1)e1 , (k + 2)e1 ) = − a2 (1 − a)k dµ∞ (a, b) → 4µ∞ [{a = 2}]. (72)

But we know that the correlation functions on the left tend to zero, thanks to our regularity
estimate (Theorem 4.5). This concludes Step 1.

                                                 27
Step 2: Limit of Pn . We may write
               Z                                      Z
          Pn =         χu/δn (δn a, δn b) dµ∞ (a, b) = fn (a, b) dµ(δ
                        discr               (δn )                     n)
                                                                   ∞ (a, b),                           (73)
                     {a≤1/δn }

where fn (a, b) := 1[a ≤ 1/δn ] · χdiscr
                                    u/δn (δn a, δn b). By working out an explicit expression for
fn , it is straightforward to see that fn converges on every compact subset of R>0 × R to χu
as n tends to infinity. Also, the fact that {y1 , y2 } ∋ 0 implies that supn,a,b (a ∨ a1 )|fn (a, b)| <
              (δ )
∞. Since µ∞n tends to µ (by hypothesis), the convergence of Pn now follows from
Lemma 6.5.

6.3    Consequences of rotational invariance
Let us briefly recap what we did so far. We introduced the compact set of measures M
described in Definition 6.3 and studied some of its properties in Lemma 6.5. This enabled
us to prove that any sequence of mesh sizes tending to zero has a “convergence sub-sequence”
(δn )n along which, for some µ ∈ M,
                                                  Z
                                        (δn )
                        Ψ2 (u) := lim Φ2 (u) = χu (a, b) dµ(a, b)                       (74)
                                      n→∞

for any horizontally strictly ordered u = (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u′2 ) ∈ D2 with {y1 , y2 } ∋ 0 (see
Equation (67), Lemma 6.8, and Figure 3).
    In this section we study the properties of the sub-sequential scaling limits µ of the spectral
measures µ∞ , in particular the consequences of the rotational invariance of Theorem 4.1.
These are specifically manifested in (78), which will eventually lead to Theorem 6.1.
Rotational invariance will be used again in the proof of Theorem 7.1, but we consider (78)
to be its main consequence.
    Set C+ := {z ∈ C : Re(z) > 0}.

Definition 6.10. To a convergence sequence (δn )n , associate the following functions:
                                             Z
                   F : C+ × R → C, (x, y) 7→ ae−ax−iby dµ(a, b),                       (75)
                                        Z s
                   IF : R>0 → R, s 7→ −     F (x, 0)dx.                                (76)
                                                      1

    The bounds in the definition of M ensure that the above functions are indeed well-
defined. In the definition of IF , the integral is taken with a sign, so that IF′ (s) = −F (s, 0)
for all s > 0.
    We gather a few properties of F first.

Lemma 6.11. For every convergence sequence (δn )n , the function F satisfies the following
properties:
  (i) For any horizontally strictly ordered (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u′2 ) ∈ (R2 )4 , we have

                 lim 1 Ψ2 (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u2 + (ε, 0)) = F (x1 + x′1 , y1 + y1′ ) − F (x′1 , y1′ ).   (77)
                 ε→0 ε

 (ii) The function F is continuous on C+ × R.
(iii) For any fixed y ∈ R, the function F ( · , y) is holomorphic on C+ ,
(iv) For any (x, y), we have |F (x, y)| ≤ F (Re(x), 0), and F (x, 0) is decreasing in x ∈ R>0 ,
 (v) We have limx→∞ F (x, 0) = 0.

                                                     28
Proof. All properties follow from (68), the bounds in the definition of M and the dominated
convergence theorem with the dominating function a ∧ a1 .

    We now turn to properties of IF . Recall that | · | is the Euclidean norm on R2 .

Lemma 6.12. For every convergence sequence (δn )n , the functions F and IF satisfy the
following properties.
   (i) The function IF is analytic.
                                                                               (δ )
  (ii) For every u = (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u′2 ) ∈ D2 , the limit Ψ2 (u) := limn→∞ Φ2 n (u) is well-
       defined and equals

             Ψ2 (u) = IF (|u2 − u1 |) + IF (|u′2 − u′1 |) − IF (|u2 − u′1 |) − IF (|u′2 − u1 |).     (78)

 (iii) For any (x, y) ∈ R>0 × R, we have

                                        F (x, y) = −∂x (IF (|(x, y)|)).                              (79)

Remark 6.13. Note the similarity between (78) and the expression of the GFF correlation
function (14). That Ψ2 (u) may be decomposed as a sum of four terms depending on the
pairwise differences of u is a simple consequence of (68) – at least for u to which (68)
applies. That the terms only depend on the Euclidean norm of the differences is a crucial
fact, which encodes the rotational invariance of the scaling limits (Theorem 4.1).

Proof. Analyticity of IF follows from the properties of F . We turn to proofs of (ii) and
(iii).
     Define R2± := {(x, y) ∈ R2 : ±x > 0}. Recall that Ψ2 is well-defined and expressed in
terms of µ for all horizontally strictly ordered u with y1 = 0 or y2 = 0 – see Lemma 6.8
The proof has four steps. First, we prove that for fixed (u1 , u′1 , u2 ) ∈ (R2− )2 × R2+ , the
function Ψ2 (u1 , u′1 , u2 , · ) is well-defined and C 1 on R2+ . Second, we prove Equation (79).
Third, we prove Equation (78) on R2− × R2− × R2+ × R2+ when y2 = 0. Finally, we extend
Equation (78) to all of D2 .

Step 1: Definition of Ψ2 (u1 , u′1 , u2 , · ). Readers may help themselves with Figure 4. Fix
(u1 , u′1 ) ∈ (R2− )2 . Let us first prove well-definedness of Ψ2 (u1 , u′1 , · , · ) on (R2+ )2 . Fix two
points u2 , u′2 ∈ (R2+ )2 . Let U denote an open set containing the line segment between u2
and u′2 , and such that its closure is a compact subset of R2+ (see Figure 4). Let θ : R2 → R2
denote the rotation by a sufficiently small angle so that θu1 , θu′1 ∈ R2− and θU ⊂ R2+ . We
may now find a path from u2 to u′2 consisting of finitely many straight line segments S ⊂ U ,
which each have the property that either S is horizontal or θS is horizontal (see Figure 4).
Write S− and S+ for the starting point and endpoint of S, respectively. By additivity of
  (δ )
Φ2 n , we get
                                     (δ )                      u′
                                                   Φ2 ( uδn1 , δn1 , Sδn− , Sδn+ )
                                               X
                                   Φ2 n (u) =                                                          (80)
                                                S
As n → ∞, all terms in the finite sum converge: if S is horizontal, then the term converges
by Lemma 6.8; if θS is horizontal, then the term converges by applying Lemma 6.8 to the
rotated system and using Theorem 4.1.
     We now prove that Ψ2 (u1 , u′1 , u2 , · ) is C 1 on U . By Lemma 6.11(i), the horizontal
partial derivative exists and is continuous (we also use the additivity property of Ψ2 ). By
applying the same reasoning to the rotated system, we find that the partial derivative
in the direction θ−1 e1 (with e1 = (1, 0)) also exists and is continuous. Since the vectors
{e1 , θ−1 e1 } span the tangent space of R2 , we conclude that Ψ2 (u1 , u′1 , u2 , · ) is C 1 on U .

                                                    29
Figure 4: In Step 1 in the proof of Lemma 6.12, we prove that Ψ2 (u1 , u′1 , · , · ) is well-defined
and C 1 on (R2+ )2 by using Lemma 6.11 and rotation invariance of Ψ2 .


Step 2: Proof of Equation (79). Readers may help themselves with Figure 5. Set
u′1 = (0, 0), u2 ∈ R2+ , and u1 = −(n − 1) · u2 for some large n > 1. As before, let
(x′1 , y1′ ) = u2 − u′1 . Recall Equation (77) from Lemma 6.11. There are two observations to
make.
      First, the dominated convergence theorem implies that limn→∞ F (nx′1 , ny1′ ) = 0, and
therefore

   lim lim 1 Ψ2 (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u2 + (ε, 0)) = lim F (nx′1 , ny1′ ) − F (x′1 , y1′ ) = −F (x′1 , y1′ ).   (81)
  n→∞ ε→0 ε                                    n→∞

    Second, we proved above that u′2 7→ Ψ2 (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u′2 ) is totally differentiable on R2+ .
Furthermore, by Theorem 4.1, it is invariant under the reflection orthogonal to the line
containing u1 , u′1 , and u2 . We conclude that the partial derivative at u2 orthogonal to
this line is zero. It is therefore natural to decompose the partial derivative we analysed
above into two: one along the line and one orthogonal to the line. The derivative along
the line can be rewritten in terms of the function F ( · , 0), using the rotation invariance of
Theorem 4.1. By doing so, we get
                                                                    
        lim 1ε Ψ2 (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u2 + (ε, 0)) = ∂x′1 |(x′1 , y1′ )| F (n · |u2 |, 0) − F (|u2 |, 0) . (82)
                                                                                                     
        ε→0

By sending n to infinity, the first term disappears by dominated convergence, so that
                                                                                
             lim lim 1ε Ψ2 (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u2 + (ε, 0)) = − ∂x′1 |(x′1 , y1′ )| F (|u2 |, 0) (83)
            n→∞ ε→0
                                                         = ∂x′1 IF (|(x′1 , y1′ )|) ,         (84)
                                                                                  


where the second line follows from the definition of IF .
   Combining (81) and (84) yields −F (x′1 , y1′ ) = ∂x′1 (IF (|(x′1 , y1′ )|)) as desired.

Step 3: Proof of Equation (78) on R2− ×R2− ×R2+ ×R2+ when y2 = 0. Fix (u1 , u′1 , u2 ) ∈
(R2− )2 ×R2+ . If u′2 = u2 , then both sides of Equation (78) equal zero. To extend Equation (78)
to every u′2 ∈ R2+ on the same horizontal line as u2 , it suffices to prove that the horizontal
partial derivatives of both sides with respect to u′2 are equal. This follows from Equations (77)
and (79).

                                                     30
                       Figure 5: Step 2 in the proof of Lemma 6.12


Step 4: Proof of Equation (78) to all of D2 . The left and right of Equation (78) are
compatible with respect to the additivity property first introduced in Equation (10), and
under applying a fixed isometry of the plane to all four points. One may therefore extend
Equation (78) from (R2− )2 × (R2+ )2 to all of D2 .

6.4   Concentration on the sub-diagonal
For every convergence sequence, the function Ψ2 is entirely determined by the function IF
introduced above. The problem therefore reduces to identifying IF . If IF happens to be a
multiple of log, then Ψ2 is a scaled version of ΨGFF
                                                 2   , the two-point function of the GFF.
    The remainder of this section is devoted to analysing IF . The analysis consists of two
steps. First, we show that for any convergence sequence, the corresponding measure µ
is supported on {|b| ≤ a}. In the second step, we use this information to derive further
properties of IF , which ultimately yield the dichotomy stated in Theorem 6.1. The first
step is essential and constitutes a central component of the article. We establish it now.
Theorem 6.14. For every convergence sub-sequence (δn )n , we have µ[{|b| > a}] = 0.
   We start with two remarks motivating the proof. In the argument, we leverage these
two perspectives and the definition of F in terms of µ to derive Theorem 6.14.
Remark 6.15. The fact that F is the horizontal partial derivative of a radially symmetric
function imposes strong constraints on F .
Remark 6.16. Consider the definition of F and suppose for a second that |b| = a almost
everywhere. Then for any (x, y) ∈ R2+ , we get
            Z                           Z                       
                −ax−iby                        −ax−i|b|y
  F (x, y) = ae         dµ(a, b) = Re       ae           dµ(a, b) = Re(F (x + iy, 0)). (85)

Although we will not really justify that |b| = a, the above perspective suggests that the
expression F (x + iy, 0) provides an interesting, alternative way to pass two-dimensional
data to F .
    Below, we shall use basic complex analysis tools such as holomorphic extensions and
contour integrals. Issues such as singularities (poles) and branch cuts then become important.
                                 √
In this context, we shall write · for the unique branch cut
                                     √
                                       · : (C \ R≤0 ) → C+                               (86)

which maps positive real numbers to positive real numbers. This means that we explicitly
                                                         √
discard real nonpositive function values for the function · .
Lemma 6.17. For any (x, y) ∈ C+ × R, we have
                                         x         p
                           F (x, y) = p         F ( x2 + y 2 , 0).                       (87)
                                       x2 + y 2

                                             31
Proof. If x is real, then this follows from Equation (79) in Lemma 6.12. For fixed y, both
sides in Equation (87) are holomorphic functions in x ∈ C+ , thanks to Lemma 6.11(iii).
Since they coincide on the positive real axis, they must be equal for all x ∈ C+ .

   The following auxiliary lemma is a standard computation of a Fourier transform. We
omit the proof.
                                                                          2
Lemma 6.18. For fixed σ, α ∈ R>0 , the Fourier transform of t2σ+σ2 sin(αt)
                                                                      t    satisfies
                                      Z b+α
            σ 2 sin(αt) −ibt
     Z
                                              σ −σ|y|
          2    2
                       e     dt = π           2e      dy = π · (1[| · | ≤ α] ∗ σ2 e−σ|·| )(b)   (88)
       R t +σ      t                   b−α

for any b ∈ R.

Proof of Theorem 6.14. Since ae−a is a strictly positive function on R>0 , it suffices to prove
that, for any λ > 1, we have
                            Z                  Z
                  F (1, 0) = ae−a dµ(a, b) = 1[|b| ≤ λa]ae−a dµ(a, b).                     (89)

Fix λ > 1. The idea is to mollify the indicator and apply a double Fourier transform, so that
extra factors appear that are compatible with the general definition of F and Equation (87).
First, for σ > 0, define Jσ as the integral on the right in Equation (89) but with a mollified
indicator:                  Z 
                                                           
                      Jσ :=      1[| · | ≤ λa] ∗ σ2 e−σ|·| (b) ae−a dµ(a, b).            (90)

By dominated convergence, Jσ converges to the integral on the right in Equation (89) as σ
tends to infinity. Thus, to prove (89), it suffices to show that

                                       Jσ −−−→ F (1, 0).                                        (91)
                                             σ→∞

   Plugging in the formula of Lemma 6.18 above yields

                                   σ 2 sin(λat) −ibt  −a
                        Z Z
                   Jσ =          2    2
                                               e    dt ae dµ(a, b).                             (92)
                              R t +σ      πt

Since the integrand is of order O(ae−a /(1 + t2 )), which is integrable in this product measure,
we can apply Fubini’s theorem to the product measure dt ⊗ µ. Rearranging yields

                                1 σ2 
                             Z            Z
                           1                             −a−ibt
                                                                         
                   Jσ =                       sin(λat)ae        dµ(a, b)   dt.              (93)
                          π R t t2 + σ 2

Using that sin(λat) = 2i1 (eiλat − e−iλat ), the definition of F gives
       Z
    2i sin(λat)ae−a−ibt dµ(a, b) = F (1 − iλt, t) − F (1 + iλt, t) =: F− (t) − F+ (t)           (94)

Plugging this into our previous expression for Jσ enables to write

                                     1 σ2
                                  Z
                               1
                                                                                                (95)
                                                               
                         Jσ =           2    2
                                                F− (t) − F+ (t) dt.
                              2πi R t t + σ
We are going to use complex analysis to study this integral, see the Figure 6 for the different
poles and integration paths.
   Let us make some remarks regarding Equation (95).

                                                32
Figure 6: The paths γε+ and γε− run along R and surround 0 using a small half-circle in the
upper and lower half-plane, respectively. The function F− − F+ is analytic on the strip
|Im(z)| < σ, hence Jσ may be written as its integral along γε− . When replacing the integral
of F− along γε− with that along γε+ , one should take into account the pole of F− at 0.


   • Equation (87) implies that

                                      1 ± iλt
                                                                                            (96)
                                                      p
                         F± (t) = p                F ( (1 ± iλt)2 + t2 , 0).
                                   (1 ± iλt)2 + t2

    • The function F− is a priori defined on R. We may extend F− and (96) as equal
      holomorphic functions on the open set N− ⊃ R, where N− ⊂ C is the largest subset
      of C such that the square root in thepdefinition of F− is well-defined. Indeed, a soon
      as the square root is well defined, F ( (1 ± iλt)2 + t2 , 0) is also defined, as the square
      root takes values in C+ . Similar considerations apply to F+ , which extends to a
      holomorphic function on the similarly defined N+ .
    • The integrand in Equation (95) is a holomorphic function on (N− ∩ N+ ) \ {±σi}. In
      particular, there is no simple pole at t = 0, because the factor 1/t is cancelled by the
      vanishing difference of holomorphic functions F− (t) − F+ (t).
Let γε− and γε+ denote the following paths:
    • γε− first runs from −∞ to −ε along R, then follows a half-circle of radius ε in the
      lower half-plane from −ε to ε, and finally runs from ε to +∞ along R,
    • γε+ is defined similarly, except that the half-circle runs in the upper half-plane.
If ε ∈ (0, σ) is so small that a ball of radius 2ε around 0 is contained in N− ∩ N+ , then the
Cauchy integral theorem yields

                                        1 σ2
                                    Z
                               1
                                                                                            (97)
                                                                  
                         Jσ =                      F− (t) − F+ (t) dt.
                              2πi     − t t2 + σ 2
                                     γε


We now argue that the functions F± are uniformly bounded on γε− . First, since they are
continuous, it suffices to bound these functions on R. But that is easy, since for real t, we
get |F± (t)| = |F (1 ± iλt, t)| ≤ F (1, 0) < ∞ (see the bound in Lemma 6.11(iv)). We may
now split the integral in Equation (97), which yields

                                  1 σ2                      1 σ2
                           Z                          Z                    
                      1
                Jσ =                 2
                                           F (t)dt −
                                          2 −                  2
                                                                     F (t)dt .
                                                                    2 +
                                                                                            (98)
                     2πi      γε− t t + σ               γε− t t + σ


For the integral on the left, we would like to replace the path γε− by γε+ . The integrand is
holomorphic in the region enclosed by the two paths, except for a simple pole at t = 0. By
the residue theorem, we get

                      1 σ2                                     1 σ2
                 Z                                         Z
                         2
                               F (t)dt = 2πiF− (0) +
                              2 −                                 2
                                                                        F (t)dt.
                                                                       2 −
                                                                                            (99)
                  γε− t t + σ                              γε+ t t + σ


                                               33
Since F− (0) = F (1, 0),
                                    1 σ2                    1 σ2
                                 Z                    Z                     
                            1
           Jσ = F (1, 0) +             2
                                             F (t)dt −
                                            2 −                2
                                                                     F (t)dt
                                                                    2 +
                                                                                         (100)
                           2πi  γε+ t t + σ             γε− t t + σ
                                     1 σ2
                               Z                    
                           1
               = F (1, 0) + Im           2
                                              F (t)dt ,
                                             2 −
                                                                                         (101)
                           π     γε+ t t + σ

since the two integrals in the first line are equal up to complex conjugation. We will now
prove that
                                          1 σ2
                                     Z
                               lim                F− (t)dt = 0.                       (102)
                              σ→∞ γ + t t2 + σ 2
                                        ε

   Recall that F− is a holomorphic function on N− ⊃ R, and that F− is uniformly bounded
on R by F (1, 0). The following claim asserts an even better control on the function F− .
Claim. All of the following hold true:
  (i) The set N− contains H+ := {z ∈ C : Im(z) > 0},
 (ii) The function |F− | is uniformly bounded on H+ ,
(iii) For any s ∈ H+ , we have limσ→∞ F− (σs) = 0.
   We shall first see that the Claim implies Equation (102). By another application of the
Cauchy integral theorem, and a change of variables t = σs,
        1 σ2                        1 σ2
    Z                         Z                          Z
                                                               1 1
                   F− (t)dt =                 F  (t)dt =              F (σs)ds.      (103)
      + t t2 + σ 2                σ t t2 + σ 2 −            1 s s2 + 1 −
     γε                        R+ i 2                     R+ i   2

By the dominated convergence theorem, the right-hand side tends to zero as σ → ∞, which
implies Equation (102) and Equation (91) follows. Thus, the proof is complete, modulo the
Claim which is proved below.

   To conclude this section, we prove the claim invoked in the argument above. Notice
that we have not used the property that λ > 1; we shall do so now (we use that λ2 − 1 > 0).

Proof of the Claim. Introduce α : C → C, t 7→ (1 − iλt)2 + t2 so that
                                          1 − iλt p
                                 F− (t) = p      F ( α(t), 0).                           (104)
                                            α(t)
We now make some simple observations√(see also Figure 7).
   • For any t ∈ C \ R<0 , we have Re( t) ≥ 1 if and only if t is on or to the right of the
     parabolic curve

                           {(1 + it)2 : t ∈ R} = {1 − t2 + 2it : t ∈ R} ⊂ C.             (105)

   • From the definition of α(t), it is immediate that α(t) lies on or to the right of this
     parabola for real t. Thus, we get Re( α(t)) ≥ 1 for any t ∈ R.
                                           p

   • For x ∈ R and y ∈ R≥0 , we may write out α(x + iy) explicitly:

                 α(x + iy) = 1 + 2λy + (λ2 − 1)(y 2 − x2 ) − 2ix(λ + (λ2 − 1)y).         (106)

      From this, it is immediate that:

                  Re(α(x + iy)) ≥ Re(α(x));         |Im(α(x + iy))| ≥ |Im(α(x))|.        (107)

      In particular, since α(x) lies on or to the right of the parabola, α(x + iy) also lies on
      or to the right of the parabola. We conclude that Re( α(t)) ≥ 1 for any t ∈ H+ .
                                                                p


                                               34
                                           Figure 7


   We have now proved N− ⊃ H+ , i.e. Property (i) of the claim. Also, with the help of
Lemma 6.11(iv) we get that, on H+ ,

                                                                                       (108)
                            p                  p
                        |F ( α(t), 0)| ≤ F (Re( α(t)), 0) ≤ F (1, 0).

This yields Property (ii) since the factor (1 − iλt)/ α(t) is also bounded on H+p
                                                                                . It remains
                                                     p

to establish Property (iii). Fix s ∈ H+ and set t = σs. The factor (1 − iλt)/ α(t) stays
bounded like before; it suffices to show that Re(α(σs)) converges to infinity as σ tends to
infinity, so that Lemma 6.11(iv) implies that

                                                                                       (109)
                             p                   p
                         |F ( α(σs), 0)| ≤ F (Re( α(σs)), 0) → 0.

   The explicit formula for α(σs) above enables us to choose ε = εs ∈ (0, π) such that, for
any R > 0 and sufficiently large σ,

                       α(σs) ∈ {reiθ : θ ∈ (−(π − ε), π − ε), r > R2 }.                (110)

By the standard way of viewing the square root (half the angle, square root of the modulus),
this implies that
                                                                                      (111)
                                      p
                           lim inf Re( α(σs)) ≥ sin( π−ε2 ) · R.
                             σ→∞

Since R was arbitrary, the limit is infinite.

Remark 6.19 (The role of λ > 1). Since our main result implies that µ[{a ̸= b}] = 0,
we may wonder how the argument fails when λ < 1. In that case, λ2 − 1 < 0, and
Equation (106) implies that α(t) has a zero in the upper half-plane at some point t = iy
with y > 0. The function F− (Equation (104)) exhibits singular behaviour around this
point, which breaks the above argument.


6.5   Derivation of the dichotomy
For any convergence sequence, we know that the associated analytic function IF is decreasing,
since IF′ (x) = −F (x, 0) ≤ 0. If IF (s) ∝ − log s, then Ψ2 ∝ ΨGFF
                                                                 2    by Equation (78) of
Lemma 6.12. To derive the dichotomy of Theorem 6.1, we must understand what happens
when the analytic function IF is not of this form. It turns out to be beneficial to encode
the property that IF (s) ∝ − log s in terms of a new function Ξ, defined as

                         Ξ : R>0 → R≥0 , s 7→ −sIF′ (s) = sF (s, 0).                   (112)

Note that IF (s) ∝ − log s if and only if Ξ is constant. We now prove the following result
on Ξ.

                                                35
Theorem 6.20. For any convergence sequence (δn )n , the function Ξ is bounded and
                                                     Z
                  −Ξ′ (s) = s∆IF (|u|)|u=se1 = s         (a2 − b2 )e−as dµ(a, b) ≥ 0.          (113)

In particular, Ξ is a non-increasing function.

    Before diving into the proof, let us extend the applicability of Lemma 6.8.

Lemma 6.21 (Extension of Lemma 6.8). Let (δn )n denote a convergence sequence. For
every u = (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u′2 ) ∈ (R2 )4 whose first coordinates of u1 and u′1 are strictly smaller
than those of u2 and u′2 ,
                                                         Z
                                             (δ )
                          Ψ2 (u) := lim Φ2 n (u) =           χu (a, b) dµ(a, b).               (114)
                                     n→∞


Proof. Fix u satisfying the assumptions of the lemma. Above, we proved already that Ψ2 (u)
exists, and that the function χu is µ-integrable. Indeed, any term of the form 1 − e−ax−iby
is of order O(a) thanks to Theorem 6.14. Thus, the left and right of Equation (114) are
well-defined; it remains to prove equality.
    Set e1 = (1, 0). We may use the additivity property to write the height difference
h(u2 /δn ) − h(u2 /δn ) as the sum of height differences along the following path:
    ′


                                u2   u2 + ne1  u′ + ne1  u′
                                   →          → 2       → 2.                                   (115)
                                δn      δn        δn     δn

Set sn := (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u2 + ne1 ) and tn := (u1 , u′1 , u′2 + ne1 , u′2 ). We claim that

                                 Ψ2 (u) = lim (Ψ2 (sn ) + Ψ2 (tn )).                           (116)
                                            n→∞

For this to be true, we must justify that the correlation function of the middle step in the
path does not appear. Yet, it tends to zero thanks to the regularity estimate (Theorem 4.5).
   We may therefore apply (twice) the case where the two last points are on the same
horizontal line to get
                                       Z
                        Ψ2 (u) = lim (χsn + χtn )(a, b) dµ(a, b).                      (117)
                                       n→∞


Finally, the dominated convergence theorem, where we use Theorem 6.14 to find the desired
dominating function, enables us to insert the missing part of the function χu to get
                                        Z
                              Ψ2 (u) = χu (a, b) dµ(a, b).                           (118)

This concludes the proof.

Proof of Theorem 6.20. To see that Ξ is bounded, recall from the definitions that
                                        Z
                               Ξ(s) = s ae−as dµ(a, b).                                        (119)

The bounds on µ ∈ M thus imply that Ξ is bounded.

                                                    36
   We now focus on proving (113). The equality on the right of (113) is Theorem 6.14.
For the equality on the left, note that the radial symmetry of IF (| · |) enables us to replace
∂x by s∂yy , to get that

                          −Ξ′ (s) = IF′ (s) + sIF′′ (s)                                    (120)
                                   = (∂x + s∂xx )IF (|(x, y)|)|(x,y)=se1                   (121)
                                   = s(∂yy + ∂xx )IF (|(x, y)|)|(x,y)=se1                  (122)
                                   = s∆IF (|u|)|u=se1 .                                    (123)

To get (113), it only remains to justify that
                                           Z
                         ∆IF (|u|)|u=se1 = (a2 − b2 )e−as dµ(a, b).                        (124)

Set u1 = −ne1 , u′1 = (0, 0), u2 = se1 , and u′2 = u2 + (x, y) (with |(x, y)| tiny). Using
Lemma 6.21 and letting n tend to infinity gives
                                              Z
                               ′
                 lim Ψ2 (u1 , u1 , u2 , u2 ) = e−as (e−ax−iby − 1) dµ(a, b).
                                         ′
                                                                                     (125)
                  n→∞

Using Lemma 6.12 and letting n tend to infinity, we get another expression for the left-hand
side of the previous equality:

                   lim Ψ2 (u1 , u′1 , u2 , u′2 ) = IF (|se1 + (x, y)|) − IF (|se1 |).      (126)
                   n→∞

Equalling the two previous identities gives
                                                     Z
               IF (|se1 + (x, y)|) − IF (|se1 |) =       e−as (e−ax−iby − 1) dµ(a, b).     (127)

Now, calculating the Laplacian in (x, y) at the point (0, 0) yields
                                          Z
                       ∆IF (|u|)|u=se1 = (a2 − b2 )e−as dµ(a, b).                          (128)

We used that we may differentiate under the integral thanks to the dominated convergence
theorem, using that a ∧ a1 is integrable, and that |b| ≤ a (Theorem 6.14).

    Before concluding the proof of the dichotomy, we summarise what has been established
so far. For any sequence (δn )n tending to zero, we may extract a sub-sequence (δn′ )n and
find some analytic function IF : R>0 → R such that all of the following hold true:
    • For any u ∈ D2 ,

      Ψ2 (u) := lim Φ2 (u/δn ) = IF (|u2 −u1 |)+IF (|u′2 −u′1 |)−IF (|u′2 −u1 |)−IF (|u2 −u′1 |).
                n→∞
                                                                                           (129)
   • The function −sIF′ (s) is nonnegative, bounded, and non-increasing.
We are now ready to prove the dichotomy result.

Proof of Theorem 6.1. We start by observing that trivially at least one of the following
three statements must hold:
                                                                                       σ2
   (i) Either there exists σ such that for every convergence sequence (δn )n , IF = − 2π  log,
  (ii) Or there exist two different σ, σ and two convergence sequences (δn )n and (δn )n such
                                        ′                                           ′
                                                          ′ 2
                                          σ2
       that IF is equal respectively to − 2π log and − (σ2π) log,

                                                  37
 (iii) Or for some convergence sequence (δn )n , the function IF is not proportional to − log.
The first two cases clearly enter into the framework of the dichotomy of Theorem 6.1.
                                              (δ )
Indeed, Lemma 6.12(ii) then implies that Φ2 n converges to its GFF counterpart. As a
consequence, (i) corresponds to the first case of the dichotomy, and (ii) to the second.
To conclude the proof, we only need prove that (iii) also implies the second case of the
dichotomy. From now on, fix some convergence sequence (δn )n such that IF ̸∝ − log.
     Using Theorem 6.20, define σ, σ ′ ∈ R≥0 such that

                                σ2                                   (σ ′ )2
                                   = lim −sIF′ (s) > lim −sIF′ (s) =         .                          (130)
                                2π s→0               s→∞              2π
From the properties in the previous lemma we see that, for any s ∈ R, we get

                                      σ2                                               (σ ′ )2
      lim IF (θs) − IF (θ) = −           log s;           lim IF (Θs) − IF (Θ) = −             log s.   (131)
     θ→0                              2π               Θ→∞                              2π
In particular, Lemma 6.12(ii) implies that for any u ∈ D2 ,
                   (δ /θ)                                            (δ /Θ)
    lim lim Φ2 n            (u) = σ 2 ΨGFF
                                       2   (u);           lim lim Φ2 n        (u) = (σ ′ )2 ΨGFF
                                                                                             2   (u).   (132)
    θ→0 n→∞                                               Θ→∞ n→∞

This means that we can take two “scaling limits of the sub-sequential scaling limit” : one
obtained by “zooming in” and the other by “zooming out”. We present the zooming-in
construction; the zooming-out case is analogous.
   Fix a dense countable family (uk )k of quadruplets in D2 . Choose a sequence (θk )k
tending to zero such that, for every k,

                                 Ψ2 (θk ui ) − σ 2 ΨGFF
                                                    2   (ui ) ≤ k1       ∀ i ≤ k.                       (133)

Next, choose an increasing sequence (nk )k such that, for every k, δnk /θk ≤ k1 and
                                   (δn )
                                 Φ2 k (θk ui ) − Ψ2 (θk ui ) ≤ k1        ∀ i ≤ k.                       (134)

With this choice the sequence (δnk /θk )k satisfies
      (δn /θk )                                   (δn )
    Φ2 k          (ui ) − σ 2 ΨGFF
                               2   (ui ) = Φ2 k (θk ui ) − σ 2 ΨGFF
                                                                2   (ui ) ≤ k2               ∀ i ≤ k.   (135)

                                           (δn /θk )
Hence, for every i, the sequence (Φ2 k  (ui )) converges pointwise as k tends to infinity to
                                                (δn /θ )
σ Ψ2 (ui ). By Corollary 4.6, this means that Φ2 k k converges to σ 2 ΨGFF
 2 GFF
                                                                         2    uniformly on
compact subsets of D2 . The same construction yields a sequence converging to (σ ′ )2 ΨGFF
                                                                                        2   .



7    Sub-sequential GFF limits for multi-point functions
This section is dedicated to proving the following result.

Theorem 7.1. Fix σ ∈ R≥0 and a sequence (δn )n tending to zero. Consider the following
statement for fixed k:
                  (δ )
             Φk n |Dk −−−→ σ k ΨGFF
                                k                   uniformly on compacts subsets of Dk .               (136)
                             n→∞

If this statement holds true for k = 2, then it holds true for all k ∈ Z≥1 .

                                                          38
    Recall Corollary 4.6, which guarantees precompactness. Hence, after passing to a
sub-sequence, we may assume that the functions converge. Throughout this section, we
therefore fix σ and (δn )n such that:
         (δ )
    • Φ2 n |D2 converges to σ 2 ΨGFF
                                 2    ,
         (δn )
    • Φk |Dk converges to some continuous function Ψk .
It suffices to prove that Ψk = σ k ΨGFF
                                    k   for every k.
                                                                                    (δ )
    The proof goes in two steps. First, we prove that the scaling limit Ψk of the Φk n is
harmonic in each coordinate, harvesting the concentration of the measure µ on {b = ±a}.
Once harmonicity has been established, we identify Ψk = σ k ΨGFF
                                                              k    as the unique function
that is harmonic and satisfies a few other properties (limit at infinity, behaviour when
merging points) that Ψk possesses. The second step uses induction on k, with the base case
k = 2 being our hypothesis.

7.1    Harmonicity
Proposition 7.2. The function Ψk is harmonic in each coordinate.
    In order to prove this proposition, we introduce the set

              H := {u = (u1 , u′1 , . . . , uk , u′k ) ∈ Dk : Ψk is harmonic in u1 at u}.           (137)

Since Ψk is naturally invariant or antisymmetric under various permutations of its arguments,
it suffices to show that H = Dk . Observe also that, for harmonicity in u1 , the position of
u′1 plays no role. We begin with the following lemma, which asserts that as long as u1 does
not lie in the convex hull of the points u2 , u′2 , . . . , uk , u′k , harmonicity basically follows from
the arguments established so far.
Lemma 7.3. We have

      Z0 := {u = (u1 , u′1 , . . . , uk , u′k ) ∈ Dk : u1 ̸∈ ConvexHull({u2 , u′2 , . . .})} ⊂ H.   (138)

Proof. Fix u ∈ Z0 . Let Cr ⊂ R2 denote the circle of radius r > 0 centred at u1 . It suffices
to prove that if r is smaller than the distance from u1 to the convex hull, then
                                Z
                         Υ :=      Ψ(u1 , s, u2 , u′2 , u3 , u′3 , . . .) ds = 0       (139)
                                     Cr

(the integral is just the uniform probability measure on Cr ).
    By applying an isometry of the plane, we may assume without loss of generality that
Cr is strictly on the left of the vertical axis {0} × R, while the convex hull is strictly on the
right of this axis.
    To prove that Υ = 0 we are going to use the spectral representation of general observables,
the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality (Theorem 4.15), and harmonicity of σ 2 ΨGFF     2    . For fixed n,
introduce the following observables belonging to A and A (cf. Equation (42)) respectively:
                                                      −       +

                                        Z
                             Xn (h) :=      (h(s/δn ) − h(u1 /δn )) ds;                     (140)
                                           Cr
                                           k
                                           Y
                                                 h(u′i /δn ) − h(ui /δn ) .                         (141)
                                                                         
                               Yn (h) :=
                                           i=2

By Theorem 4.15, we have
                                           q
                         |ECylL [Xn Yn ]| ≤ ECylL [Xn X†n ]ECylL [Yn† Yn ].                         (142)

                                                     39
The left-hand side converges to |Υ| as we take L and then n to infinity. It suffices to prove
that the right-hand side converges to 0 in the same double limit. Yet,
                 R                              R                           
   (Xn X†n )(h) = Cr (h(s/δn ) − h(u1 /δn )) ds      Cr h† (s/δ ) − h† (u /δ ) ds .
                                                               n         1 n            (143)

The ECylL -expectation of this random variable tends to zero in the double limit by uniform
convergence and harmonicity of σ 2 ΨGFF
                                     2   .
    It remains to demonstrate that the expectation of Yn† Yn stays uniformly bounded in
the double limit. But this is obvious since it tends to the bounded function

                     Ψ2k−2 u2 , u′2 , . . . , uk , u′k , (u2 )† , (u′2 )† , . . . , (uk )† , (u′k )† ) < ∞.   (144)

Here, we remind that (u)† has been introduced in Subsection 4.5.3 and corresponds to the
reflection of u over { 12 } × R. This concludes the proof.

    We now extend harmonicity from Z0 to all of Dk (see Figure 8 for an illustration). We
start by a technical lemma.
Lemma 7.4. Suppose that ũ ∈ Dk may be obtained from u = (u1 , u′1 , . . . , uk , u′k ) ∈ Dk by
choosing a line L ⊂ R2 such that ui and u′i lie strictly on the same side of L for each i, and
then moving all points on one side of the line by a distance of λ0 ∈ R≥0 perpendicularly
away from L.
    Then, u ∈ H whenever Nũ ⊂ H for some neighbourhood Nũ of ũ.
Proof. By applying an isometry of the plane and permuting the different {ui , u′i }, we can
assume without loss of generality that L = {0} × R, that the pairs {ui , u′i } lie on the left of
L for i ≤ ℓ and on the right of L for i > ℓ, and that we move the points on the right of L
to the right by λ0 ∈ R≥0 .
    Set e1 = (1, 0). For s ∈ R2 and λ ∈ R≥0 , define

  u−,s := (u1 , s, u2 , u′2 , . . . , u′ℓ );       u+,λ := (uℓ+1 + λe1 , u′ℓ+1 + λe1 , . . . , u′k + λe1 ). (145)

For any r > 0, we let Cr denote the circle of radius r around u1 . We claim that the function
                                        Z
                             Υr (λ) :=       Ψk (u−,s , u+,λ ) ds                       (146)
                                                         Cr

satisfies Υr (0) = 0 for small enough r, which would establish the harmonicity and the
lemma.
    Fix r at least so small that the convex hull of Cr does not intersect L or ∪i>1 {ui , u′i }.
Since Υr : R≥0 → R is a continuous function and Υr (λ) = 0 for λ ≈ λ0 and r small enough
and Nũ ⊂ H, it suffices to demonstrate that Υr |(0,∞) is an analytic function.
    For fixed n, introduce the following observables belonging to A− and A+ respectively:
                             R                                          ℓ
                                                                        Y
                                                                                 h(u′i /δn ) − h(ui /δn ) ;   (147)
                                                                                                         
               Xn (h) :=         Cr (h(s/δn ) − h(u1 /δn )) ds
                                                                          i=2
                               k
                               Y
                                       h(u′i /δn ) − h(ui /δn ) .                                             (148)
                                                               
               Yn (h) :=
                             i=ℓ+1

Theorem 4.15 implies that for any λ > 0,
                                                          Z
                               Υr (λ) = lim lim               (1 − a)⌊λ/δn ⌋ dµXn ,Yn ,L ,                    (149)
                                               n→∞ L→∞


                                                              40
                                             Figure 8


where µXn ,Yn ,L satisfies the following bound on its total variation
                                        q
                         ∥µXn ,Yn ,L ∥ ≤ ECylL [Xn X†n ]ECylL [Yn† Yn ].                     (150)

Now, Theorem 4.5 gives the following. Since there is some constant C < ∞ such that
EZ2 [Xn X†n ]EZ2 [Yn† Yn ] ≤ C 2 for any n, we may find a complex measure µX,Y on [0, ∞]
such that ∥µX,Y ∥ ≤ C and µX,Y is a sub-sequential limit in the weak topology on complex
measures on the compact set [0, ∞] of the family (µXn ,Yn ,L,δn )n,L as L and then n tend to
infinity.
    In particular, these statements imply that for any λ > 0, we have
                                            Z
                                   Υr (λ) = e−aλ dµX,Y (a).                            (151)

Then, Υr |(0,∞) is the Laplace transform of a finite complex measure on [0, ∞], or equivalently
the linear combination (with complex coefficients) of four Laplace transforms of finite positive
measure on [0, ∞]. It is automatically analytic.

   We are now ready to prove full harmonicity.

Proof of Proposition 7.2. Consider the set (see Figure 8)

                   Dk′ := {u ∈ Dk : min |ui − uj | > 1000k 2 max |u′i − ui |}.               (152)
                                      i̸=j                       i

We proceed in two steps. We first show that Dk′ ⊂ H, and then show that Dk ⊂ H, which
is equivalent to the claim.

Step 1: proof that Dk′ ⊂ H. Recall the definition of Z0 from Lemma 7.3. Define
inductively the sets Zt+1 (for t ∈ Z≥0 ) as the collection of elements u ∈ Dk obtained from
some ũ ∈ Zt via the operation described in the previous lemma. By construction, the
previous lemma implies that ∪t Zt ⊂ H.
    It suffices to prove that Dk′ ⊂ Z2 . Fix u ∈ Dk′ . We can choose two lines L and L′ (see
Figure 8) such that
    • R2 \ (L ∪ L′ ) is composed of four infinite “triangular” connected components T1 , . . . , T4
       indexed in clockwise order around the intersection point L ∩ L′ ,
    • u1 and u′1 lie in T1 ,
    • each pair {ui , u′i } (for i ≥ 2) is contained either in T2 or in T4 .
    Translate all points in T2 by a distance λ ≫ 1 in the direction perpendicular to the line
separating T1 and T2 . Next, translate all points in T4 by a distance λ′ ≫ 1 in the direction
perpendicular to the line separating T1 and T4 .
    After these translations, it is straightforward to verify that u1 and u′1 no longer lie in
the convex hull of the remaining points. The resulting 2k-tuple therefore belongs to Z0 . By
definition of the sets Zt , the configuration before the second translation lies in Z1 , and the
original configuration u lies in Z2 .

                                                41
Step 2: proof that Dk ⊂ H. Fix u = (u1 , u′1 , . . . , uk , u′k ) ∈ Dk . We write Ψk (u) as a
sum of increments that are of the form Ψk (v) for v ∈ Dk′ .
    Since harmonicity in u1 does not depend on the position of u′1 , we may assume without
loss of generality that u′1 is extremely close to u1 . Let (γi )i=2,...,k denote a family of disjoint
smooth curves [0, 1] → R2 of finite length where γi starts at ui and ends at u′i . Then, for
any N ∈ Z≥1 , linearity of expectation implies that

                  N
                  X             N
                                X
       Ψk (u) =           ···           Ψk (u1 , u′1 , γ2 ( n2N−1 ), γ2 ( nN2 ), . . . , γk ( nkN−1 ), γk ( nNk )).   (153)
                  n2 =1         nk =1


By continuity, for N sufficiently large, all terms on the right correspond to 2k-tuples in Dk′ .
Since each term is harmonic in u1 , it follows that Ψ(u) is harmonic in u1 as well.

7.2    Characterisation of GFF correlation functions
We are now ready to prove Theorem 7.1. The idea is to proceed inductively.

Proof of Theorem 7.1. We wish to prove that Ψk = σ k ΨGFF     k    by inducting on k ∈ 2Z≥1 .
The base case k = 2 holds true by hypothesis. Now, fix k and suppose that the statement
holds true for all ℓ < k.
    Let us gather gather the properties of Ψk established so far. We view Ψk as a function
in u1 ∈ R2 \ ∪i>1 {ui , u′i } while all other arguments are fixed. This function satisfies the
following properties.
    • Harmonicity: Ψk is harmonic in u1 by Proposition 7.2.
    • Full-plane asymptotics: Ψk converges to a constant in R as |u1 | → ∞. Indeed, the
      regularity estimate (Theorem 4.5) implies that Ψk (u) → 0 as |u1 |, |u′1 | → ∞, which
      implies that Ψk (u) tends to a finite constant as u′1 is fixed and |u1 | → ∞.
    • Fusion asymptotics: for any i > 1 and v ∈ {ui , u′i }, Theorem 4.8 implies that as u1
      tends to v,

                      Ψk (u) = Ψ2 (u1 , u′1 , ui , u′i )Ψk−2 (((uj , u′j ))j̸∈{1,i} ) + O(1),                         (154)

      where Ψ2 = σ 2 ΨGFF
                       2   and Ψk−2 = σ k−2 ΨGFF
                                               k−2 by the induction hypothesis.
   • Value at one specific point: Ψk (u) = 0 at u1 = u′1 .
   By extension theorems around singularities for harmonic functions [Ces14], these four
properties (harmonicity together with the analysis of the singularities) fully determine the
function Ψk , and yield Ψk = σ k ΨGFF
                                  k   . This completes the proof.


8     Sub-sequential GFF limits
This section is dedicated to proving the following result.

Theorem 8.1 (Convergence criterion). Fix σ ∈ R≥0 and let (δn )n denote a sequence
tending to zero. If for all k ∈ Z≥1 ,

                   (δ )
                  Φk n |Dk −−−→ σ k ΨGFF
                                     k                         uniformly on compacts of Dk ,                          (155)
                                 n→∞

then the height function converges to σ · GFF along the scaling sequence (δn )n in the sense
of Definition 2.7.

                                                              42
Proof. The proof relies on a single input: the regularity estimate of Theorem 4.5. The
theorem is therefore valid for any model for which similar regularity estimates hold.
   Fix σ ∈ [0, ∞) and a sequence (δn )n tending to zero. Recall Definition 2.7 which
describes GFF convergence. Our objective is to prove convergence of finite-dimensional
marginals, and convergence in law.

Convergence of finite-dimensional marginals. The generalised test functions with
finite Dirichlet energy form a Hilbert space where the inner product is given by the Dirichlet
form. Therefore, it suffices to consider a single generalised test function φ with finite
Dirichlet energy, and prove that

                      ⟨h(δn ) , φ⟩ −−−→ N 0, σ 2                                              (156)
                                                       R                            
                                                           GR2 (u, v) dφ(u) dφ(v)
                                  n→∞

in law. Since a normal distribution is determined by its moments, it suffices to prove
that all moments of the random variable ⟨h(δn ) , φ⟩ converge to the desired limits [Bil95,
Example 30.1 and Theorem 30.2], which is precisely what we will do.
    Without loss of generality, we may assume that |φ|(R2 ) = 2 and φ = φ+ − φ− where
the two measures are probability measures. We first observe that
                              Z                            Z
                                  (δn ) ′           ′
                 ⟨h , φ⟩ = h (u ) dφ+ (u ) − h(δn ) (u) dφ− (u)
                    (δn )
                                                                                     (157)
                              Z Z
                           =       (h(δn ) (u′ ) − h(δn ) (u)) dφ+ (u′ ) dφ− (u).    (158)

   Fix k ∈ Z≥1 . Nothing needs to be proven for odd values of k since the corresponding
moment is zero. We therefore restrict to k even. In the discrete setting, Fubini’s theorem
can be applied to get
                                 "Z Z                                              k #
                                                                 
      EZ2 [⟨h(δn ) , φ⟩k ] = EZ2         h(δn ) (u′ ) − h(δn ) (u) dφ+ (u′ ) dφ− (u)     (159)
                            Z
                                 (δ )
                        =       Φk n (u) dφ̃k (u)                                             (160)

where
                      dφ̃k (u) := dφ− (u1 ) dφ+ (u′1 ) · · · dφ− (uk ) dφ+ (u′k ).            (161)
The integrand converges to σ k · ΨGFFk    as n → ∞ by our assumption (Equation (155)).
Therefore, it suffices to justify an application of the dominated convergence theorem to
ensure the convergence to the corresponding moments of the GFF.
   By definition,
                                     (δ )                             u′
                                   Φk n (u) = Φk ([ uδn1 ], . . . , [ δnk ])                  (162)

where [z] ∈ F (Z2 ) denotes the face whose lower-left corner is (⌊z1 ⌋, ⌊z2 ⌋) for any z ∈ R2 .
We shall find a dominating function using the regularity estimate (Theorem 4.5). We may
do so separately for each pairing π of {1, . . . , k} involved in (30). We focus on the pairing
π = {(1, 2), . . . , (k − 1, k)}. Since the integrals factorise over the pairs, it suffices to prove
that the following integral converges:
                                           (
                                            e−αk Sn (u)    if Sn (u) ≥ 20k 2 ;
                           Z
                              dφ̃2 (u) sup                                                     (163)
                                        n   1 ∨ −Sn′ (u) if Sn (u) < 20k 2 ;

                                                     43
                                 u′                 u′
where Sn# (u) := SR#2 ({[ uδn1 ], [ δn1 ]}, {[ uδn2 ], [ δn2 ]}, with # denoting either no superscript or the
apostrophe ′ .
   Since φ̃2 (u) is a probability measure, it suffices to prove that
                                Z
                                       dφ̃2 (u) sup max{0, −Sn′ (u)} < ∞.                               (164)
                                                n

By going back to the definitions of SR2 and SR′ 2 , it is quite straightforward to find a constant
η such that
                         max{0, −Sn′ (u)} ≤ max{0, −SR2 (u)} + η.                            (165)
Thus, it suffices to prove that
                             Z
                                      max{0, −SR2 (u)} dφ̃2 (u) < ∞.                                  (166)

Now, recall the explicit formula for SR2 . Since φ̃2 is compactly supported, Equation (166)
follows from the fact that φ has finite Dirichlet energy.

Convergence in the negative regularity Hölder space. Fix U ⊂ R2 bounded and
open and α ∈ (−1, 0). It suffices to prove that the family of random distributions (h(δn ) |U )
is tight in C α (U ), since any sub-sequential limit must then coincide with σ · GFF by the
convergence of finite-dimensional marginals proved above.
     Furlan and Mourrat established a general tightness criterion for random fields in
negative regularity Hölder spaces [FM17, Theorem 1.1]. We apply this theorem (let us
borrow notation from the paper) with β = 0 and with some integer p > − α1 . Notice also
that, since our random function h(δn ) is stationary, we do not need to take a supremum
over x. Recall that T1 ((−1, 1)2 ) denotes the set of generalised test functions supported in
(−1, 1)2 and whose density with respect to the Lebesgue measure is Lipschitz. By [FM17,
Theorem 1.1], it suffices to prove that for any φ ∈ T1 ((−1, 1)2 ), we have
                                       sup EZ2 [|⟨h(δ) , φ⟩|p ] < ∞.                                  (167)
                                      δ∈(0,1)

Naturally, the supremum over n in [FM17, Theorem 1.1] is encoded in our scaling parameter
δ, which is why it does not appear explicitly. But Equation (167) was already established
above: the generalised test function φ has finite Dirichlet energy since it is Lipschitz, and
the uniform bound in Equation (167) comes from the existence of the dominating function
discussed above. To finish, [FM17, Theorem 1.1] implies tightness in the topological space
induced by all semi-norms (∥ · ∥C α (V ) )V , which implies tightness in C α (U ) in particular.
    For tightness in the Besov spaces Bp,qα for α ∈ (−1, 0), p ∈ [1, ∞), and q ∈ [1, ∞], notice

that the bounds in Equation (167) match the hypothesis in [FM17, Theorem 2.30], which
implies the desired result. By [BL76, Theorem 6.2.4], this also implies the desired tightness
in the Sobolev space W α,p (U ).


9     Proof of the main result (Theorem 2.8)
Proof of Theorem √ 2.8. Theorems 6.1, 7.1, and 8.1 jointly imply that, for a = b = 1 and for
any fixed c ∈ [ 3, 2], one of the following two statements holds true:
   • There exists some σ ∈ R≥0 such that the height function converges to σ · GFF,
   • There exist two distinct standard deviations σ, σ ′ ∈ R≥0 and two sequences (δn )n and
      (δn′ )n tending to zero, such that the height function converges to σ · GFF along the
      scaling sequence (δn )n , and to σ ′ · GFF along the scaling sequence (δn′ )n .

                                                         44
Yet, we may rule out the second case, since σ and σ ′ cannot be distinct. Indeed, the
combination of Theorems 4.3 and 4.4 yields that both σ 2 and (σ ′ )2 should be equal to
1/ arcsin c2 . Thus, we are in the first case with σ 2 = 1/ arcsin c2 .

    We record an additional result that may be useful in future works. Although our proof of
the main theorem required a somewhat indirect route, we are now in a position to establish
the convergence of the spectral measures. In particular, the sub-sequential limiting measure
µ introduced earlier is in fact unique, and is simply the limit of the spectral measures.
                                          √
Theorem 9.1. Fix a = b = 1 and c ∈ [ 3, 2]. Then, if µL denotes the measure given by
Theorem 4.12 (cf. the explicit construction in Equation (219) that follows), then

                                     (δ)                           σ2
                         lim lim µL = 12 (δb=a + δb=−a ) ·            da.               (168)
                         δ→0 L→∞                                  2πa
Proof. Since (µL )L∈2Z>0 ⊂ M, the family is precompact. It therefore suffices to show that
                                                               σ2
any subsequential limit µ coincides with 21 (δb=a + δb=−a ) · 2πa da.
                                     (δ)
     We invoke the convergence of Φ2 to σ 2 · ΨGFF
                                               2   . This yields
                                                          σ2
                                IF (s) − IF (1) = −          log s,                     (169)
                                                          2π
which, together with (79), implies
                                                         σ2
                                           F (s, 0) =       .                           (170)
                                                        2πs
Let us turn to the measure µ to see what the previous formula implies. We already know
that µ[{|b| > a}] = 0. To prove that µ[{|b| < a}] = 0, observe that (113) gives
                          Z
                             (a2 − b2 )e−a dµ(a, b) = −Ξ′ (1) = 0,                (171)

since Ξ(s) = sF (s, 0) = σ 2 /(2π) is constant. We therefore obtain that µ[{|b| < a}] = 0.
    It remains to identify the marginal in the a-variable and show that
                                                    σ2
                                       dµ(a) =         da.                              (172)
                                                   2πa
By the definition and the formula for F , we get that for every x > 0,
                                                     σ2
                                 Z
                                    ae−ax dµ(a) =       .                               (173)
                                                    2πx
                                                                            2
The right-hand side is precisely the Laplace transform of the measure 2πa
                                                                       σ
                                                                          da. Since a σ-finite
positive measure is uniquely determined by its Laplace transform, this identifies µ and
completes the proof.


10      Proof for the anisotropic case (Theorem 3.3)
The convergence of multi-point correlation functions and finite-dimensional marginals is
extended to the anisotropic six-vertex models as follows: first express these quantities in
terms of the macroscopic loops of a random-cluster model on an associated isoradial graph,
and then invoke the universality result of [Dum+20], which ensures that the scaling limit
of the loop ensemble is identical to that of the isotropic case. Consequently, the limiting
correlations coincide with those obtained in the isotropic setting.

                                                 45
Proof of Theorem 3.3. Fix ∆ ∈ [−1, −1/2]. Consider the six-vertex model with weights
a, b, c given by (20). Throughout this section, we restrict to the regime where ∆(a, b, c) is
set to be equal to ∆. By definition of this parametrization, ζ is fixed and the only remaining
degree of freedom is the angle θ. We write E6V    Lθ (Z2 ) for the corresponding anisotropic
six-vertex measure on Lθ (Z ), and denote by h its associated height function.
                            2

    The Baxter–Kelland–Wu correspondence [BKW76] maps this six-vertex model on Lθ (Z2 )
to the random-cluster model on an isoradial graph L(θ) (a rotated version of a rectangular
lattice) with the corresponding isoradial weights; see [Dum+20] for details. The explicit
construction of this random-cluster model will not be needed here. We will only use the fact
that its loop representation is naturally supported on Lθ (Z2 ). Following the notation of
[Dum+20; Ave+a], we denote by ϕδL(θ),q the law of the loop ensemble of the random-cluster
measure on δL(θ) with the relevant isoradial weights.


Convergence of multi-point correlation functions. Fix k ∈ 2Z≥1 and u ∈ Dk . We
assume without loss of generality that all 2k points in u are distinct. In this section only,
we shall write u = (u1 , u2 , . . . , u2k ). Write F for the powerset of {1, . . . , 2k} with subsets
of cardinal 0, 1, and 2k removed.
    For a given loop ensemble L and S ⊂ {1, . . . , 2k}, let NS denote the number of loops
in L that surround all points in {ui : i ∈ S} and none of the points in {uj : j ∈          / S}. For
S = {v}, we write simply Nv .
    Now [Ave+a, Proposition 2.5] asserts that we may find real polynomials PR ∈ R[(XS )S∈F ]
associated with each R ⊂ {1, . . . , k} such that the following holds true: for every u ∈ Dk ,
and every mesh size δ for which none of the points lie on edges of δLθ (Z2 ) (so that one
may unambiguously decide whether the points xi are surrounded by the loops in L),
            " k                               #                                "                                         #
             Y                                             X                       Y
E6V                h(δ) (u2i−1 )−h(δ) (u2i ) =
                                                                                                                    
 Lθ (Z2 )                                                           ϕδL(θ),q             (N2i−1 −N2i ) PR (NS )S∈F           .
             i=1                                   R⊂{1,...,k}                     i∈R
                                                                                       (174)
Moreover, [Ave+a, Lemma 4.5] asserts that we may restrict to “large” loops. More precisely,
fix ε > 0, and let Njbig be the number of loops contributing to Nj that are not contained in
the ball of radius ε centred at uj . Then, there exists a universal constant c > 0 such that
for every ε > 0, the terms on the right in (174) satisfy
              "                                            #
                  Y                                    
   ϕδL(θ),q             (N2i−1 − N2i ) PR (NS )S∈F
                  i∈R
                                                   "                                                #
                                                               big     big
                                                       Y
                                                                                                        + O(εc ). (175)
                                                                                         
                                      = ϕδL(θ),q             (N2i−1 − N2i  ) PR (NS )S∈F
                                                       i∈R


Combining the previous two displayed equations, we obtain that the k-point correlations of
the anisotropic six-vertex model can be approximated (with an error tending to zero as ε
tends to zero) in terms of a functional depending only on the loops of radius at least ε in
the loop ensemble obtained from the random-cluster model on δL(θ). The universality of
the random-cluster model on isoradial graphs, proved in [Dum+20], implies that the law of
the loop ensembles for different values of θ are equal. In particular, the one with angle θ is
the same as the one with angle π/2, which is related to the isotropic six-vertex model. We
deduce that for every η > 0 and every compact set K ⊂ Dk , there exists δ0 (k, K, η) > 0

                                                               46
such that for every 0 < δ < δ0 and u ∈ K,
                                 " k                                              #
                                                                                         (δ)
                                  Y
                     E6V                  (δ)                (δ)
                                                                                                      (176)
                                                                              
                      Lθ (Z2 )          h       (u2i ) − h         (u2i−1 )           − Φk (u) ≤ η,
                                  i=1

                            (δ)
where we recall that Φk (u) denotes the correlation function of the isotropic case. In
particular, uniform convergence of the k-point correlations on compact subsets of Dk for
the isotropic case θ = π/2 (Theorem 2.8) immediately transfers to the anisotropic case with
arbitrary θ.

Convergence of finite-dimensional marginals. Having established convergence of
the multi-point correlation functions, it is natural to attempt the strategy used in the
isotropic setting. The problem with this strategy is that it requires a dominating function
(for applying the dominated convergence theorem), which we found in terms of uniform
bounds on the correlation functions. At this point, a technical difficulty arises: Theorem 4.5
relies on crossing estimates for the spin representation, and these are not readily available
in the anisotropic case. Implementing such an approach would therefore require revisiting
the entire analysis without the symmetry given by the π/2 rotation.
                                                                               (δ)
    To bypass this issue, we work directly with Equation (18) instead. Let hθ be the height
function of the anisotropic six-vertex model on Lθ (Z2 ), and fix a finite Dirichlet energy test
                                                            (δ)
function φ. Recall that if the characteristic function of ⟨hθ , φ⟩ converges pointwise to that
of a Gaussian, then this sequence converges to that Gaussian in law in the weak topology.
    For a loop ensemble L, define (whenever the infinite product is well-defined)
                                                      Y
                                        Aφ (L) :=            cosµ φ(int(ℓ)).                          (177)
                                                      ℓ∈L

                     (δ)
   Let L(δ) and Lθ denote the loop ensembles associated with the random-cluster model
on δL( π2 ) and δL(θ), respectively. Extracting a sub-sequence of (δn )n if necessary, we
                                    (δ )
may assume that L(δn ) and Lθ n converge in law to loop ensembles Lcont and Lcont          θ  . Let
ϕcont and ϕcont
            θ   denote   their laws. The   result of [Ave+a] ensures that   for    every t ∈ R, the
quantities Atφ (L ) and Atφ (Lθ ) are almost surely well-defined and integrable, and
                  cont             cont

that
                                                                   h               i
                                                                     it⟨h(δn ) ,φ⟩
       ϕcont Atφ (Lcont ) = lim ϕδn L( π ) Atφ (L(δn ) ) = lim E6V                            (178)
                                                     
                                                                Z2 e                 ,
                                  n→∞            2                            n→∞
                                                                                      (δ )
                                                                               h              i
                                                        (δn )                    it⟨hθ n ,φ⟩
       ϕcont          cont                                             6V
                                                                                                      (179)
                                            
        θ     A tφ (L θ    )   = lim ϕ δn L(θ)  A tφ (L θ    )  = lim E     2
                                                                       Lθ (Z )   e              ,
                                  n→∞                                     n→∞

where the second equality in each line is simply (18). The universality result in [Dum+20]
asserts that the two limiting loop ensembles have the same law, and therefore the quantities
on the left are the same. Since we already identified the characteristic function in the
isotropic case, this also implies the desired pointwise convergence of the characteristic
function in the anistropic case.

Remark 10.1. The fact that we do not get regularity for the anisotropic case explains
why we refrain from stating convergence in Hölder spaces, as establishing it would require
substantial additional technical work. Nevertheless, we expect that such a result could be
obtained without encountering any fundamental obstacles.

                                                         47
Part C
Ingredient 4: Spectral representation of
correlation functions
This part derives the results stated in Ingredient 4, namely Theorems 4.12 and 4.15. The
value of L ∈ 2Z≥1 is fixed throughout this part. The two theorems follow from the basic
symmetries on the cylinder (translation invariance, reflection invariance, and invariance
under global arrow flip). We stress that while the transfer matrix of the six-vertex model
has an extremely rich structure, the purpose of this part is underlining almost the opposite
fact: demonstrating that the properties required for Part B do not require this structure,
and are very general.


11        Transfer matrix formalism
Recall that CylL = (V (CylL ), E(CylL )) is the nearest-neighbour graph on the vertex set
V (CylL ) := Z × (Z/LZ). Write Ei for the horizontal edges between {i} × (Z/LZ) and
{i + 1} × (Z/LZ). The set Ei is called the i-th column of horizontal edges. We also write
Eii′ for the union of Ei ∪ Ei+1 ∪ · · · ∪ Ei′ with the set of all vertical edges between those
columns (i.e. with endpoints in {i + 1, . . . , i′ } × (Z/LZ)).
    A column configuration is an element κ ∈ {±1}Z/LZ encoding arrow orientations in a
column Ei of horizontal arrows. There are L vertical positions; κj = +1 means that the
arrow in position j is oriented to the right; κj = −1 means that the arrow is oriented       to
the left. Write C for the set of balanced column configurations, meaning that j κj = 0.
                                                                                    P
Similarly, the vertical column configuration along the vertical line {k} × R/LZ is an element
αk ∈ {±1}Z/LZ encoding arrow orientations of vertical arrows. There are L vertical positions;
αjk = +1 means that the arrow between positions j and j + 1 points up; αjk = −1 means
that the arrow points down. An arrow configuration on Eii′ may be written as a family
((κk )i≤k≤i′ , (αk )i<k≤i′ ), where the κk encode the horizontal arrows in column Ek , and the
αk the vertical arrows on {k} × R/LZ.
                                          ′
    For i ≤ i′ and ζ, ζ ′ ∈ C, let Pii   ζζ ′ denote the probability measure on {±1}
                                                                                      Eii′ with

boundary conditions ζ and ζ , defined by
                                  ′

      ′    ′                                               ′    ′
      ′ Pζζ ′ [((κ )i≤k≤i′ , (α )i<k≤i′ )] := 1[(κ , κ ) = (ζ, ζ )] · 1[ice rule] · c               , (180)
   ii ii          k            k                  i i                                 #{c-vertices}
  Zζζ
               ′
where Zζζ
       ii is a normalisation factor given by
          ′


            ii′                              ′
                       X
         Zζζ   ′ :=                1[(κi , κi ) = (ζ, ζ ′ )] · 1[ice rule] · c#{c-vertices} .        (181)
                       (κk )i≤k≤i′ , (αk )i<k≤i′

We collect a few basic properties.
Lemma 11.1 (Basic properties of the probability measures).
 (i) One-step law. For any i ∈ Z and κ, κ′ ∈ {±1}Z/LZ ,
               i(i+1) i(i+1) i+1                                                         i+1 ′
          Zκκ′       Pκκ′ [α ] = 1[ice rule for (κ, αi+1 , κ′ )] · c#{c-vertices in (κ, α , κ )} .   (182)

 (ii) Composition rule. For any i ≤ i′ ≤ i′′ and κ, κ′′ ∈ {±1}Z/LZ ,
                         ii′′ ii′′          ii′    i′ i′′   ii′    i′ i′′
                                        X
                        Zκκ ′′ Pκκ′′ :=   Zκκ   ′ Zκ′ κ′′ (Pκκ′ × Pκ′ κ′′ ).                         (183)
                                                   κ′ ∈C


                                                       48
(iii) Torus measure. We have
                                                                                    X
                   ZTM,L PTM,L [{balanced}]PTM,L [ · |{balanced}] =                        0M 0M
                                                                                          Zκκ Pκκ .   (184)
                                                                                    κ∈C

 (iv) Reflection symetry. Let i ≤ i′ and let X denote a random variable which is
      measurable in terms of the arrows in Eii′ . (Recall that the arrows encode the gradient
      of the height function.) Let X† denote the random variable measurable in terms of
      the arrows in E(−i′ )(−i) obtained by composing X with the reflection of the gradient
      over R. Then,
                                          ′       (−i′ )(−i)
                                      Eii
                                       κκ′ [X] = Eκ′ κ       [X† ].                     (185)
 (v) Horizontal shift invariance. Let i ≤ i′ and let X denote a random variable which
     is measurable in terms of the arrows in Eii′ . For n ∈ Z, let τ(n,0) denote the shift by
     (n, 0), and let τ(n,0) (X) denote the random variable measurable in terms of E(i+n)(i′ +n)
     obtained by composing X with the shift. Then,
                                      ′              (i+n)(i′ +n)
                                   Eii
                                    κκ′ [X] = Eκκ′                  [τ(n,0) (X)].                     (186)

Proof. The first three follow from bookkeeping manipulations of the sums. The final two
are symmetries of the six-vertex model.

      The previous lemma reveals a Hilbert space structure. Let Ω := ℓ2 (C) denote the
complex Hilbert space with orthonormal basis (eκ )κ∈C . Use the symbol † for the Hermitian
conjugate of vectors and operators. Associate a Hilbert space Ωi := Ω to each column of
horizontal edges Ei . For each valid triple, that is, a triple (X, i, i′ ), where i ≤ i′ and where
X is a complex-valued operator depending only on the edges in Eii′ , we define the operator
    ′
 X : Ωi → Ωi′ via
oii
                                          ′       ii′ ii′
                                 e†κ′ oii
                                       X eκ := Zκκ′ Eκκ′ [X].                                 (187)
Within this framework, the above lemma readily implies the following corollary.
Corollary 11.2 (Basic properties of operators).
                                                                    i(i+1)
 (i) One-step partition function. The operator t(π/2) := o1                , which corresponds to
     the one-step partition function, is independent of the choice of i, and satisfies
                                                                                         ′
          e†κ′ t(π/2)eκ :=
                            X
                                  1[ice rule for (κ, α, κ′ )] · c#{c-vertices in (κ, α, κ )} . (188)
                            α∈{±1}L

 (ii) Composition rule. For any two valid triples (X, i, i′ ) and (Y, i′ , i′′ ), the composition
      (XY, i, i′′ ) is a valid triple, and
                                                ′′        ′ ′′        ′
                                           oii    ii   ii
                                            XY = oY ◦ oX .                                            (189)

(iii) Torus measure. For any valid triple (X, 0, M ),

                    ZTM,L PTM,L [{balanced}]ETM,L [X|{balanced}] = Trace o0M
                                                                          X .                         (190)

 (iv) Reflection symmetry. For any valid triple (X, i, i′ ) where X is real-valued,
                                                †′         (−i′ )(−i)
                                           (oii
                                             X ) = oX†                    .                           (191)

 (v) Horizontal shift-invariance. For any valid triple (X, i, i′ ) and n ∈ Z≥0 ,
                                            (i+n)(i′ +n)       ′
                                           oτ      (X)   = oii
                                                            X    .                                    (192)
                                             (n,0)



                                                     49
     We now turn to the transfer matrix t(π/2) itself.

Lemma 11.3 (Basic properties of the transfer matrix). The operator t(π/2) is a Hermitian
Perron-Frobenius matrix with a single block. Therefore, it is diagonal in some orthonormal
basis (vk )k with real eigenvalues, and the basis may be labelled such that the corresponding
eigenvalues (λk (π/2))k satisfy

                       λ0 (π/2) > |λ1 (π/2)| ≥ |λ2 (π/2)| ≥ λ3 (π/2) ≥ · · · .             (193)

Finally, v0 may be chosen such that it has positive real entries in the basis (eκ )κ .

Proof. The operator t(π/2) is a real symmetric matrix in the basis (eκ )κ . Therefore, it is
Hermitian. It may be checked directly that it is a Perron-Frobenius matrix. It is easy to see
that t(π/2)k has positive entries for sufficiently large k. As a consequence, it has a single
block. The rest follows.

     Define
                     t(π/2)                     λk (π/2)                 ′   ′       ′
                                                                                  i −i
       T (π/2) :=            ;    Λk (π/2) :=            ;      Oii    ii
                                                                 X := oX /λ0 (π/2)     .   (194)
                    λ0 (π/2)                    λ0 (π/2)

Remark 11.4 (Lemma 11.3). The eigenspace of T (π/2) associated with the top eigenvalue
1 is one-dimensional. The convention that v0 has positive real entries simply fixes the
complex phase of the normalised eigenvector corresponding to λ0 (π/2). The spectrum of
T (π/2) is supported on (−1, 1] since −1 cannot be an eigenvalue of T (π/2) due to the
Perron–Frobenius property.

     By construction, for any valid triple (X, i, i′ ), we have
                                                                     ′
                                                                  M −(i −i) )    ′
                                                  Trace(oii
                                                          X t(π/2)                      ′
  ECylL [X] = lim PTM,L [X|{balanced}] = lim                        M
                                                                              = v0† Oii
                                                                                     X v0 .
              M →∞                          M →∞       Trace t(π/2)
                                                                                          (195)
Indeed, the rightmost equality is obtained by observing that only the largest eigenvalue of
t(π/2) contributes.
   We conclude this subsection by observing that Lemma 4.11 is now straightforward.

Proof of Lemma 4.11. See Equation (195) above.


12      Spectral representation of general observables (Theorem 4.15)
Proof of Theorem 4.15. Consider the setting of the theorem, and fix L. Define the embed-
dings
                                                             (−i)0
                                 E − : A− → Ω,     X 7→ OX           v0 ;                  (196)
                                 E + : A+ → Ω† ,      Y 7→ v0† O0i
                                                                Y,                         (197)

where i is chosen so large that X and Y are measurable with respect to the arrows in E(−i)0
and E0i respectively. The definitions do not depend on i since the composition rule implies
that
                             v0† OY      = v0† T (π/2) O0i   †
                                  0(i+1)                        0i
                                                        Y = v0 OY                     (198)
(the proof for E − is the same). Notice that E − and E + are linear maps that map real vector
spaces to complex vector spaces.

                                                 50
Step 1: Definition of µX,Y,L . For X and Y, define the measure µX,Y,L on [0, 2) via

                                          E + (Y)vk vk† E − (X) δ1−Λk (π/2) .
                                      X
                                                                                              (199)
                                                              
                         µX,Y,L :=
                                      k

(Above, δx denotes the Dirac measure at the point x.)

Step 2: Proof of (i). Using Equation (195) and the composition rule in the first equality,
horizontal shift invariance in the second and the definition of the embeddings in the third,
we get

                     ECylL [X · τ(n,0) (Y)] = v0† Oτ
                                                      n(i+n)               (−i)0
                                                                 T (π/2)n OX     v0           (200)
                                                       (n,0) (Y)

                                           = v0† O0i
                                                                      (−i)0
                                                           n
                                                  Y T (π/2) OX                v0              (201)
                                                                   n −
                                               +
                                           = E (Y)T (π/2) E (X).                              (202)

Using (199), this implies the desired formula
                                                     Z
                          ECylL [X · τ(n,0) (Y)] =        (1 − a)n dµX,Y,L (a).               (203)


Step 3: Proof of (ii). For X, reflection symmetry and the definition of the embeddings
imply
              E + (X† ) = v0† O0i    †   −i0 †    −i0   †      −
                               X† = v0 (OX ) = (OX v0 ) = (E (X)) .
                                                                     †
                                                                                 (204)
As a consequence, µX,X† ,L is a positive measure since for every k,

             E + (X† )vk vk† E − (X) = E − (X)† vk vk† E − (X) = ∥E − (X)† vk ∥2 ≥ 0.         (205)
                                                           


It remains to prove the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality (Equation (46)). Using (203) (for n = 0)
and the definition of the total variation, we obtain

                                                                    E + (Y)vk vk† E − (X) .
                                                             X
                                                                                              (206)
                                                                                        
      |ECylL [XY]| = |µX,Y,L [[0, 2)]| ≤ ∥µX,Y,L ∥ ≤
                                                               k

Applying the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality to the sum on the right-hand side gives
      X                              2  X +           X               
               E + (Y)vk vk† E − (X)         ∥E (Y)vk ∥2      ∥vk† E − (X)∥2 .                (207)
                        
                                         ≤
         k                                       k                        k

Using (203) (for n = 0) in the other direction together with the positivity of µX,X† ,L gives
                                                      Z
                     ∥vk† E − (X)∥2 = ∥µX,X† ,L ∥ =
                X
                                                           dµX,X† ,L (a) = ECylL [XX† ].      (208)
                 k

Applying the same argument, we similarly obtain
                                 X
                                      ∥E + (Y)vk ∥2 = ECylL [Y† Y].                           (209)
                                  k

Combining (206)–(209) yields the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, completing the proof.

                                                   51
13     Spectral representation for the two-point function (Theo-
       rem 4.12)
Before diving into the proof of Theorem 4.12, let us start by introducing two more operators
– the vertical-arrow and up-shift operators – and discuss their basic properties. To measure
arrow-arrow correlations between vertical arrows, we introduce some new operators encoding
the direction of the vertical arrow between positions j and j + 1. For j ∈ (Z/LZ), set
              αj , or equivalently
sj (π/2) := o01

     e†κ′ sj (π/2)eκ := Zκκ
                         01 01
                           ′ Eκκ′ [αj ]                                                             (210)
                                                                                            ′
                          X
                    :=          αj · 1[ice rule for (κ, α, κ′ )] · c#{c-vertices in (κ, α, κ )} .   (211)
                        α∈{±1}L

Write S(π/2) := O01
                 α0 = s0 (π/2)/λ0 (π/2).

Remark 13.1. For Step 3, it suffices to compute the arrow-arrow correlation between two
vertical arrows. We shall see that the general case follows from the addition rule and a
mixing property. We therefore work exclusively with the operator that measures vertical
arrows and avoid introducing operators for horizontal arrows altogether.
    Next, define the up-shift operator. For any κ ∈ C, we let κ↑ ∈ C denote the column
configuration such that (κ↑ )i = κi−1 . Similarly, we define κ↓ ∈ C such that (κ↓ )↑ = κ. They
are called the up and down shift respectively. Define the up-shift operator T (0) : Ω → Ω by

                                       e†κ′ T (0)eκ := 1[κ′ = κ↑ ].                                 (212)

By going back to the definition of sj (π/2), it is easy to see that

                           sj (π/2) = T (0)j s0 (π/2)T (0)−j ;                                      (213)
                                      sj (π/2)
                               O01
                                 αj =            = T (0)j S(π/2)T (0)−j .                           (214)
                                      λ0 (π/2)
Let us now collect some basic properties of these operators.
Lemma 13.2 (The shift operator). The basis (vk )k introduced in Lemma 11.3 may be
chosen such that it diagonalises T (0) as well. If Λk (0) denotes the eigenvalue associated
with vk , then the Λk (0) are L-th roots of unity, and Λ0 (0) = 1.
Proof. The operator T (0) is normal since T (0) commutes with T (0)† = T (0)−1 . Moreover,
T (0) and T (π/2) commute thanks to shift-invariance of the six-vertex model. Therefore
T (0) and T (π/2) are co-diagonalisable. We suppose without loss of generality that T (0)
was already diagonal in the basis (vk )k . This can be done without breaking the properties of
(vk )k from Lemma 11.3. Indeed, in Lemma 11.3 we simply chose an arbitrary orthonormal
basis diagonalising T (π/2), and then ordered it, but the ordering does not play a role here
(in particular because the eigenspace of the Λ0 (π/2) is one dimensional).
     Since T (0)L = Identity, its eigenvalues are L-th roots of unity. Finally, v0 is the
Perron-Frobenius eigenvector of T (π/2), and we imposed that all its entries in the basis
(eκ )κ are strictly positive. Since T (0) has non-negative coefficients (it is a permutation
matrix) in the basis (eκ )κ , this means that the entries of T (0)v0 are also positive. Since
T (0)v0 = Λ0 (0)v0 , it forces Λ0 (0) = 1.

Lemma 13.3 (The edge measurement operator). The operator S(π/2) is anti-Hermitian,
and v0† S(π/2)v0 = 0.

                                                    52
Proof. Focus on the first property. It is straightforward to see that s0 (π/2) is anti-Hermitian,
by going back to its definition in the basis (eκ )κ . Indeed, the definitions imply that
                                                                                         ′
    e†κ′ s0 (π/2)eκ =
                       X
                             αj · 1[ice rule for (κ, α, κ′ )] · c#{c-vertices in (κ, α, κ )} (215)
                       α∈{±1}L
                                                                                         ′
                         X
                   =             αj · 1[ice rule for (κ′ , −α, κ)] · c#{c-vertices in (κ , −α, κ)}   (216)
                       α∈{±1}L

                   = −e†κ s0 (π/2)eκ′ .                                                              (217)

For the second property, notice that Equation (195) yields

    v0† S(π/2)v0 = v0† O01
                        α0 v0 = ECylL [the orientation of a fixed vertical edge] = 0,                (218)

where the expectation is zero since the measure is invariant under a global arrow flip.

Proof of Theorem 4.12. For any even integer L, define the measure

                                 X |v † S(π/2)v0 |2
                        µL :=             k
                                                      δ                           .                  (219)
                                       (1 − Λk (π/2))2 (1−Λk (π/2),−i log Λk (0))
                                 k>0

   The support of µL is contained in (0, 2) × [−π, π), since |Λk (π/2)| < 1 for every k > 0.
This inequality also ensures that the denominator 1 − Λk (π/2) is nonzero for every k > 0,
thereby validating the definition.
   The proof now proceeds in three steps. First, we prove Equation (41) under the
constraint that y1 = y2 = 0. Then, we extend it to the generality of Theorem 4.12. Finally,
we conclude the proof.

Step 1: Equation (41) under the constraint that y1 = y2 = 0. In this step, we
consider u where u1 and u′1 are on the same horizontal line, and that the same holds true
for u2 and u′2 . In that case, ΦCylL ,2 (u) can be written as a sum of two-point functions for u
with (u1 , u′1 ) and (u2 , u′2 ) horizontally adjacent. The additivity property of Equation (10)
therefore reduces the problem to proving Equation (41) in this special case.
     We work out the left and right of Equation (41). Consider u. When u′1 − u1 = u′2 − u2 =
(1, 0), we are just calculating an arrow-arrow correlation between vertical arrows. Recall
the definition of u2 − u′1 = (x′1 , y1′ ), and that y(u) denotes the second coordinate of u ∈ R2 .
For the left-hand side, we get

   ΦCylL ,2 (u) = ECylL [(h(u′1 ) − h(u1 ))(h(u′2 ) − h(u2 ))]                                       (220)
                                          x′1
               = v0† O01
                      αy(u ) T (π/2)            O01
                                                 αy(u ) v0                                           (221)
                           2                         1
                                                                      ′
               = v0† T (0)y(u2 ) S(π/2)T (0)−y(u2 ) T (π/2)x1 T (0)y(u1 ) S(π/2)T (0)−y(u1 ) v0      (222)
                                        x′1       −y1′
               = v0† S(π/2)T (π/2) T (0)                 S(π/2)v0 .                                  (223)

In the last line we use that T (π/2) and T (0) commute. By expanding S(π/2) in the basis
(vk )k , and using the anti-Hermitian property, we get
                                                                 ′         ′
                                      X †
                     ΦCylL ,2 (u) = −   |vk S(π/2)v0 |2 Λk (π/2)x1 Λk (0)−y1 .     (224)
                                          k>0


We omitted the k = 0 term since v0† S(π/2)v0 = 0 due to flip symmetry (218).

                                                          53
   For the right hand side of Equation (41) we get, using that x1 = x2 = 1 and y1 = y2 = 0,
  Z
                 ′     ′
    −a2 (1 − a)x1 e−iby1 dµL (a, b)
                               X |v † S(π/2)v0 |2                               ′        ′
                          =−           k
                                                       (1 − Λk (π/2))2 Λk (π/2)x1 Λk (0)−y1 . (225)
                                     (1 − Λk (π/2))2
                               k>0

This matches the expression we found for ΦCylL ,2 (u).

Step 2 : Equation (41) in the general case. We now relax the condition that each
pair (ui , u′i ) lies on a horizontal line.
    We shall first relax the condition that y1 = 0, and then the condition that y2 = 0. In
fact, the two proofs are the same, and we focus on the first step.
    Fix u such that y1 ̸= 0 and y2 = 0. The idea is to write ΦCylL ,2 (u) as the sum of three
terms, where two terms fall under the umbrella of Step 4, and where the third term is an
error term that tends to zero in a certain limit.
    More precisely, we write the height difference h(u′1 ) − h(u1 ) as a sum of increments
along the path (u1 , u1 − ne1 , u′1 − ne1 , u′1 ), with e1 = (1, 0). The first and third steps are
covered by Step 4, thus giving

 ΦCylL ,2 (u) − ΦCylL ,2 u1 − ne1 , u′1 − ne1 , u2 , u′2
                                                         
  Z                                                       
                               ′        ′
 = ((1 − a)x2 − 1) (1 − a)x1 e−iby1 1 − (1 − a)x1 e−iby1 (1 − (1 − a)n ) dµL (a, b). (226)

Now let n tend to infinity. Since µL is a finite sum of Dirac measures with 0 < a < 2 almost
surely, the right-hand side tends to
              Z                                                     
                                         ′      ′
                ((1 − a)x2 − 1) (1 − a)x1 e−iby1 1 − (1 − a)x1 e−iby1 dµL (a, b).       (227)

It suffices to prove that as n tends to infinity, the following error term vanishes:

ΦCylL ,2 u1 − ne1 , u′1 − ne1 , u2 , u′2 = ECylL h(u′1 − ne1 ) − h(u1 − ne1 ) h(u′2 ) − h(u2 ) .
                                                                                           

                                                                                           (228)
But this expectation may be written as

                                       v0† O2 T (π/2)n O1 v0 ,                               (229)

where each Oi measures one of the two height differences. As n tends to infinity, this tends
to v0† O2 v0 v0† O1 v0 , since Λ0 (π/2) = 1 and all other eigenvalues have a modulus strictly
smaller than 1. But v0† O1 v0 = v0† O2 v0 = 0 as each factor encodes the expectation of a
single height difference, which is zero by global flip symmetry. This proves the case that
y1 ̸= 0 and y2 = 0; the general case is proved similarly.

Step 3: Conclusion We constructed the measure µL above, we observed that it is
supported on (0, 2) × [−π, π), and we established Equation (41) for all the desired points u.
The fact that µL [{|b| ∈ (0, 2π/L)}] = 0 follows from the observation that the eigenvalues
e−ib of T (0) are L-th roots of unity.
    Finally, we want to prove that µL is invariant under the reflection (a, b) 7→ (a, −b). But
this is immediate, as we may simply replace µL by its symmetrised version (µL + µ̄L )/2 owing
to the real-valuedness of the correlation function, which is invariant under the reflection by
construction and clearly still satisfies all the other properties of Theorem 4.12.

                                                 54
Remark 13.4. The above reflection (a, b) 7→ (a, −b) corresponds to applying a complex
conjugation to the weighted eigenvalues of the two operators. Complex conjugation is an
element of the Galois group of the field extension R ⊂ C. Since all operators are real-valued
in the basis (eκ )κ , the Galois group preserves the weighted joint spectra of T (π/2) and T (0).
In particular, the formula in (219) is itself invariant under the reflection (a, b) 7→ (a, −b).


Part D
Ingredient 3: Regularity estimates and
qualitative behaviour
The purpose of this part is to prove the following intermediate results:
    • Existence of the infinite-volume six-vertex measure (Theorem 2.2),
    • The results stated in Ingredient 3 (Theorems 4.5, 4.8, 4.9, 4.10, and Corollary 4.7).
These results have already been applied in Part B, and we will apply them again in Part E
(where we derive the remaining missing ingredients).
    The proofs in this part are based on the Fortuin–Kasteleyn–Ginibre (FKG) inequality
and the Russo–Seymour–Welsh (RSW) theory. We already mentioned that several repre-
sentations of the six-vertex model satisfy this FKG inequality for c ≥ 1. We found the
spin representation of the six-vertex model the most convenient for formalising the proof
(see [Lis22; Lis21; GL25]). We expect that the proofs can also be written down in terms of
the FKG inequality for the absolute value of the height function (see [Dum+24]), but we
do not pursue this route here.
    This part is organised as follows. Sections 14–16 introduce the spin representation and
its properties. Although the results are more or less known (for the spin representation, the
results may be found, for example, in [GL25]), we still state everything precisely because we
need some subtle variations of the known results, as well as minor extensions. Everything
is written in a self-contained fashion, except for the circuit estimate, which was proved
in [Dum+24] and [GL25].
    Once the language and standard results for the spin representation have been established,
we prove the desired intermediate results one by one in Sections 17–23.


14     Spin representation and RSW theory
14.1    Motivation of the spin representation
Recall that h : F (Z2 ) → Z denotes the height function representation of the six-vertex
model, which is a function differing by ±1 on neighbouring faces and which assigns an even
number to the face whose south-west corner is (0, 0). We may partition F (Z2 ) into two so
that h assigns even numbers to F◦ (the even faces) and odd numbers to F• (the odd faces).
   The gradient of h can be recovered from the values of h modulo 4, that is, from the
function
                          h/4Z : F (Z2 ) → Z/4Z, x 7→ h(x) + 4Z.                     (230)
Moreover, this height function modulo 4 can be encoded in terms of a family (σ◦ , σ• ) ∈
        2            2
{±}F◦ (Z ) × {±}F• (Z ) of spins. Indeed, we may simply define (σ◦ , σ• ) as follows:
  • If x is even, then                      (
                                             + if h(x) ∈ 0 + 4Z,
                                  σ◦ (x) :=                                           (231)
                                             − if h(x) ∈ 2 + 4Z;

                                               55
   • If x is odd, then                     (
                                            + if h(x) ∈ 1 + 4Z,
                                 σ• (x) :=                                              (232)
                                            − if h(x) ∈ 3 + 4Z.

The spin representation of a height function (that is, the height function modulo 4) thus
encodes the height function up to constant shifts by constant multiples of 4. Spins at even
faces are called even spins and spins at odd faces are called odd spins.
    The spin representation turns out to be useful because of two reasons:
    • The even spins satisfy the Fortuin–Kasteleyn–Ginibre inequality,
    • The even spins have a “smallest” and “largest” value, namely − and + respectively,
      setting it appart from the height function which is unbounded and has no smallest or
      largest value.
    Although F (Z2 ) is a set of faces, we often identify each face with its face centre. This
way we may view F (Z2 ) as a vertex set embedded in R2 , and we may identify edges between
faces with line segments between face centres. Note that this coincides with the standard
dual graph of Z2 , but we avoid referring to it explicitly since several other graphs will
appear later on.

14.2    Formal definition of the spin representation
Definition 14.1 (Even and odd sublattices). We shall identify each face in F (Z2 ) with its
face centre. The set of even faces F◦ is endowed with an edge set E◦ such that the four
neighbours of a face at (i, j) are given by (i ± 1, j ± 1). We shall also simply write F◦ for
the graph (F◦ , E◦ ). Similar definitions apply to the odd sublattice F• . See Figure 9.


Definition 14.2 (Even domain). In the context of percolation theory, we shall identify
each edge {x, y} ⊂ R2 with the straight closed line segment connecting the vertices x and y.
Let ∂D denote a finite self-avoiding circuit through the even sublattice F◦ . We let F◦ (D)
denote the subgraph of F◦ consisting of the vertices and edges which are entirely contained
in the closure of the set of points surrounded by ∂D (in particular, ∂D ⊂ F◦ (D)). Its
edge set is denoted E◦ (D) and its vertex set simply F◦ (D). The subgraph F• (D) ⊂ F• is
defined similarly, except that obviously ∂D cannot be a subgraph of F• (D). The triple
D := (∂D, F◦ (D), F• (D)) is called an even domain, see Figure 9. We also write F (D) for
the subgraph of the graph F (Z2 ) (where faces sharing an edge are neighbours) induced by
the vertex set F◦ (D) ∪ F• (D). We shall not define or use odd domains.

Definition 14.3 (Consistent spin configurations). Let D denote an even domain. A spin
configuration on D is a pair

                              (σ◦ , σ• ) ∈ {±}F◦ (D) × {±}F• (D) .                      (233)

We call such a spin configuration consistent if for any edge uv ∈ E• (D) with dual edge
xy = uv ∗ ∈ E◦ (D) (here dual means intersecting it in its middle), we have

                   σ• (u) = σ• (v)    or      σ◦ (x) = σ◦ (y)        (or both).         (234)

In this case we write σ◦ ⊥ σ• ; see Figure 9 for a consistent spin configuration.

   The ice rule and the consistency rule are two sides of the same coin: they are the
necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of the associated height function.

                                              56
         (a) The even and odd lattices                            (b) An even domain




      (c) A consistent spin configuration             (d) A positive probability triple (σ◦ , ω, σ• )

                                              Figure 9


Definition 14.4 (Agreement edges). We also introduce an associated set of agreement
edges
                      A(σ◦ ) := {xy ∈ E◦ (D) : σ◦ (x) = σ◦ (y)}.               (235)
We introduce the same notation for σ• . Thus, two spin configurations are consistent if and
only if the complements of the agreement edges do not cross each other.
    In the definitions below, we use the symbol ∝ to denote “proportional to;” The reader
should bear in mind that a normalization constant is implicitly present to ensure that the
measures are probability measures.
    We would like to define a probability measure µ+ D in which the random pair (σ◦ , σ• )
follows the distribution

                µ+
                 D [(σ◦ , σ• )] ∝ 1[σ◦ |∂D ≡ +] · 1[σ◦ ⊥ σ• ] · c
                                                                  #A(σ◦ )
                                                                          · c#A(σ• ) .            (236)

We shall prove that this is just a transformation of the six-vertex model with fixed boundary
conditions at parameters a = b = 1 and c ∈ [1, 2].
    We interpret the above formula as follows: σ◦ and σ• are independent ferromagnetic
Ising models (on dual graphs), conditioned on the event that their domain walls do not
intersect. The Ising model σ◦ comes with fixed boundary conditions, while σ• comes with
free boundary conditions.
    After conditioning on σ◦ , the distribution of σ• may be interpreted as an Ising model,
except that some of its coupling constants are set to infinity (due to the indicator function

                                                 57
1[σ◦ ⊥ σ• ]). This conditional Ising model has an FK–Ising coupling. Rather than taking
Equation (236) as a definition, we shall directly define the probability measure µ+   D on a
larger space, which also incorporates this FK–Ising coupling. In what follows, the associated
percolation configuration will be denoted by ω.
Definition 14.5 (Spin measure). Consider an even domain D. Let Ω = ΩD denote the
sample space
                      Ω := {±}F◦ (D) × {0, 1}E◦ (D) × {±}F• (D) .          (237)
A typical element is denoted (σ◦ , ω, σ• ). We often identify ω with the set {xy ∈ E◦ (D) :
ω(xy) = 1}, and use the standard percolation terminology. Below, for an edge xy ∈ E◦ , let
xy ∗ be the unique edge in E• sharing the same middle. Define the probability measure µ+D
on (σ◦ , ω, σ• ) ∈ Ω by

   µ+
    D [(σ◦ , ω, σ• )] ∝ 1[σ◦ |∂D ≡ +] · 1[∂D ⊂ ω] · 1[ω ⊂ A(σ◦ )]                           (238)
                                            ∗
                           · 1[xy ∈ ω or xy ∈ A(σ• ) (or both) for any xy ∈ E◦ (D)]         (239)
                                           #ω          #(A(σ◦ )\ω)
                           · c#A(σ◦ ) · c1     · 1 − c1              .                      (240)

See Figure 9 for a sample from this measure.

                               D is consistent with Equation (236).
Lemma 14.6. The definition of µ+
Proof. For fixed (σ◦ , σ• ) one recovers Equation (236) by summing over ω.

14.3    Basic properties of the spin representation
Recall that an edge xy ⊂ R2 is identified with the straight line segment from x to y. For
example, we view ω as a (closed) subset of R2 ; each edge is represented by a closed line
segment between the two face centres.
Lemma 14.7 (Flip symmetry). Consider the measure µ+        D conditional on (σ◦ , ω). Then the
distribution of σ• is given by flipping a fair coin for each bounded connected component of
R2 \ ω.
Proof. It is immediate from the definition of µ+D that conditionally on (σ◦ , ω), the distribu-
tion of σ• is uniform in the set of configurations {±}F• (D) satisfying

                            xy ∗ ∈ A(σ• ) for any xy ∈ E◦ (D) \ ω,                          (241)

see also Figure 9. This leads to the distribution stated in the lemma.

    We now consider the marginal law of the pair (σ◦ , ω). This marginal is particularly
useful, as we often disregard the odd-spin configuration σ• . For a set A ⊂ R2 , let f (A) be
the number of connected components of R2 \ A.
Lemma 14.8 ((σ◦ , ω) marginal). For every (σ◦ , ω) ∈ {±}F◦ (D) × {0, 1}E◦ (D) ,

  µ+
   D [(σ◦ , ω)] ∝
                                                                           #(A(σ◦ )\ω)
            1[σ◦ |∂D ≡ +]1[∂D ⊂ ω]1[ω ⊂ A(σ◦ )]2f (ω) c#A(σ◦ )−#ω 1 − c1                  . (242)

Proof. The proof is related to the previous lemma. For fixed (σ◦ , ω), one needs to count the
number of configurations σ• which satisfy the condition in Equation (241). This number if
simply given by 2f (ω)−1 (the −1 is due to the fact that the unique unbounded connected
component is not involved). This leads to the expression in the lemma.

                                                58
    We now state a simple combinatorial observation. To understand the law of (σ◦ , ω), it is
clearly important to evaluate f (ω), that is, to count the number of connected components
of R2 \ ω. Since ω ⊂ A(σ◦ ), each edge in ω connects two spins with the same sign. Thus,
we may write A(σ◦ ) = A− (σ◦ ) ∪ A+ (σ◦ ) and ω = ω − ∪ ω + , where:
    • A− (σ◦ ) and ω − connect faces with σ◦ -spin −,
    • A+ (σ◦ ) and ω + connect faces with σ◦ -spin +,
    • No face is incident to an edge of A− (σ◦ ) and an edge of A+ (σ◦ ),
    • No face is incident to an edge of ω − and an edge of ω + .
In particular, we observe that the following formula holds:
                                                 X
                               f (ω) = −1 +           f (ω # ).                       (243)
                                                  #∈{+,−}

We shall also write ω̄ for the ordered pair of two percolation configurations (ω◦+ , ω◦− ). We
would like to rewrite the weight in Lemma 14.8 in terms of these new objects. The (long)
expression in the following lemma shows that ω◦+ and ω◦− only interact via σ◦ , that is, they
are independent after conditioning on σ◦ .
Lemma 14.9. For any (σ◦ , ω̄) ∈ {±}F◦ (D) × {0, 1}E◦ (D) × {0, 1}E◦ (D) , we have

  µ+
   D [(σ◦ , ω̄)] ∝ c
                    #A(σ◦ )
                                                                                                 (244)
                                                           +     +
                                                               1 #ω
                                                                                    +       +
                                                                               1 #(A (σ◦ )\ω )
                  × 1[∂D ⊂ ω◦+ ]1[ω◦+ ⊂ A+ (σ◦ )]2f (ω ) c                                       (245)
                                                                                
                                                                     · 1− c
                                          −       #ω −            #(A− (σ◦ )\ω − )
                  × 1[ω◦− ⊂ A− (σ◦ )]2f (ω ) c1        · 1 − c1                                  (246)
                                                               
                                                                                   .

Proof. This follows from Equation (243) and straightforward manipulations.

    In Equation (243), the simple topology of the plane R2 plays an important role; the
equation does not immediately generalise to, for example, the torus. When working with
the torus, we must therefore slightly modify our setup (see Section 18 and Lemma 18.5).
    Until now we defined all our measures with + boundary conditions, but they can equally
be defined with − boundary conditions; we write µ−  D for this measure.


14.4    Six-vertex height function with fixed boundary conditions
The spin representation is directly related to the six-vertex model. Consider an even domain
D and (σ◦ , ω, σ• ) ∼ µ+
                       D . Given (σ◦ , σ• ), one recovers the gradient of the height function via
the definition of the spins at the beginning of this section (Page 55). More precisely, for
adjacent faces uv with u ∈ F◦ and v ∈ F• , then

                                    h(v) − h(u) = σ◦ (u)σ• (v).                                  (247)

 This defines the gradient of h on F (D) in the measure µ+
                                                         D . The gradient is turned into a
non-gradient function by imposing that it equals 0 on ∂D.
    The function h so defined is a height function on F (D): an integer-valued function
h : F (D) → Z which differs by exactly ±1 on adjacent faces and which, as such, preserves
the parity of each face. By Lemma 14.6 (Equation (236)), its law is given by:

                                  µ+
                                   D [h] ∝ 1[h|∂D ≡ 0] · c
                                                           #A(h)
                                                                 ,                               (248)

where A(h) ⊂ E◦ (D) ∪ E• (D) denotes the agreement diagonals. The factor c#A(h) is
consistent with the definition of the six-vertex model (Equation (2)) since a = b = 1 and
since c-type vertices induce one more agreement diagonal than a-type or b-type vertices.

                                                  59
Definition 14.10 (Level lines). From now on, for any k ∈ 2Z, write

                       Ak = Ak (h) := {uv ∈ E◦ (D) : h(u) = h(v) = k};                        (249)
                       ω k := ω ∩ Ak .                                                        (250)

The percolation ω k ⊂ E◦ (D) is called the level line of height k.
    Notice that                       [                         [
                              ω+ =          ωk ;        ω− =            ωk .                  (251)
                                     k∈4Z                      k∈4Z+2

Notice that (ω k )k∈2Z does not just partition ω: this partition also has the property that
each connected component of ω is contained in one ω k . If a connected component α of ω is
a subset of ω k , then h(x) = k for any x incident to α, and we simply say that α has height
k.
    Before, we saw that the odd spins can only change sign if they are separated by ω-edges
(see for example Lemma 14.7). This immediately implies an intermediate value theorem,
which also motivates the terminology of level lines.
Lemma 14.11 (Intermediate value theorem). Consider the measure µ+          D in some even
domain D. Fix a target height k ∈ 2Z as well as two faces u, v ∈ F (D) and two heights
a, b ∈ Z with a < k < b. Then almost surely, the following statement holds true: if h(u) = a
and h(v) = b and if γ : u → v is any continuous path in R2 from u to v, then γ hits ω k .

14.5    Markov property of the spin representation
The spin representation satisfies a Markov property along even domains, a feature that will
be fundamental to the analysis below. We present this property in the current section.
    If D and B are two even domains, then we write D ⊂ B, and say that D is contained in
B, whenever E◦ (D) ⊂ E◦ (B). Consider two even domains D ⊂ B. Recall the definition of
the sample space ΩD (Definition 14.5), and write πD : ΩB → ΩD for the natural projection
map (which simply erases the values of the spins and edges not relevant to ΩD ). Write πDc

for the complementary projection map, so that πD × πD is the identity map on ΩD .
                                                        c


Lemma 14.12 (Markov property). Consider two even domains D ⊂ B. For #, ♭ ∈ {±}
such that µ#           ♭
           B [{∂D ⊂ ω }] > 0,
                #
   • The law µB [ · |{∂D ⊂ ω ♭ }] of πD (σ◦ , ω̄, σ• ) is the same as the law µ♭D of (σ◦ , ω̄, σ• ),
   • The random variables πD and πD    c are independent in µ# [ · |{∂D ⊂ ω ♭ }].
                                                                   B

Proof. Take the expression in Lemma 14.9 and insert an extra indicator for the conditional
event. It is then straightforward to work out that the weight factorises over D and its
complement, as desired.

   Since the distribution of σ• conditional on (σ◦ , ω̄) is very simple (Lemma 14.7), it makes
sense to focus the analysis entirely on (σ◦ , ω̄). From now on, we shall write

                                 Ω◦D := {±}F◦ (D) × {0, 1}E◦ (D) .                            (252)

For any D ⊂ B, we write πD◦ : Ω◦ → Ω◦ for the associated projection map, and π c,◦ for the
                                B       D                                            D
natural complementary projection map such that πD     ◦ × π c,◦ = π ◦ . Finally, we shall often
                                                           D       B
drop the subscript ◦ from σ◦ , ω, ω̄, and ω◦± for brevity.
   We want to prove one more Markov property, for so-called polar domains. A polar
domain is an even domain D together with a partition ∂D into two segments labelled ∂ + D

                                                   60
                                  Figure 10: A polar domain.


and ∂ − D. More precisely, we impose that the vertices of these segments partition the
vertices on ∂D, and that the edges of the segments partition E(∂D) except that the two
edges connecting the endpoints do not belong to any part (see Figure 10).
Lemma 14.13 (Markov property for polar domains). Consider a polar domain (D, ∂ + D, ∂ − D)
as well as another even domain B ⊃ D. Consider the event

                              E := {∂ + D ⊂ ω + and ∂ − D ⊂ ω − }.                           (253)

Let # ∈ {±}. If µ#                                                  #
                 B [E] > 0, then in the conditional measure ν := µB [ · |E], there is a Markov
property over ∂D for (σ◦ , ω). More precisely, πD◦ and π c,◦ are independent in ν.
                                                        D

Proof. On the event E, the values of σ◦ on ∂D are known. Thus, the only factor in the
weight of Lemma 14.9 that may make πD ◦ and π c,◦ interact, is the factor
                                                D
                                               ♭
                                      Y
                                          2f (ω ) .                             (254)
                                            ♭∈±

Notice that on the event E, we have

     f (ω ♭ ) = 1 + #conn. comp. of R2 \ ω ♭ which are entirely surrounded by ∂D             (255)
                 + #conn. comp. of R \ ω which are entirely outside ∂D.
                                        2    ♭
                                                                                             (256)

The first term on the right is πD ◦ -measurable, and the second term is π c,◦ -measurable,
                                                                         D
proving the desired factorisation and independence.


15     FKG inequality of the spin representation
We now state and prove the Fortuin-Kasteleyn-Ginibre (FKG) inequality. We also discuss
several of its immediate consequences.
Definition 15.1 (Increasing functions and the FKG property). A random variable is called
◦-increasing (or simply increasing) if it may be written as an increasing function of the
triple (σ◦ , ω + , −ω − ). Notice the minus sign in the last entry; this means that ω◦− -open edges
are lower in the partial order on such triples. A random variable X is called ◦-decreasing
(or simply decreasing) whenever −X is ◦-increasing. An event is called ◦-increasing or
◦-decreasing if its indicator function is ◦-increasing or ◦-decreasing respectively.
    A probability measure µ is said to have ◦-FKG (or simply FKG) whenever

                            Covµ [X, Y ] := µ[XY ] − µ[X]µ[Y ] ≥ 0                           (257)

for any bounded ◦-increasing random variables X and Y which are measurable in terms of
finitely many spins and edges.

                                                  61
   The following statement captures the essence of this subsection.
                                 −
Lemma 15.2. The measures µ+
                          D and µD have ◦-FKG for any even domain D.

    This lemma was proved in [GL25], but we shall state and prove a more general version
of it. More precisely, we shall define lattice events, which are events E with the property
that conditioning on E preserves FKG. Many events of interest can be partitioned into
lattice events, which is very useful when applying the FKG inequality.
Definition 15.3 (Lattice event). A ◦-lattice event (or lattice event) is an event of the form

                                  {ω|Q = ζ} ∩ {σ◦ |B = ξ},                                (258)

where B and Q contain vertices and edges of F◦ respectively, and such that B contains all
endpoints of edges in Q. Naturally, we require that ζ ∈ {0, 1}Q and ξ ∈ {±}B . Notice that
if Q = B = ∅, then E is just the entire sample space.
Proposition 15.4 (FKG inequality). Consider an even domain D and a ◦-lattice event E.
Let # ∈ {±}. If µ#                                                    #
                 D [E] > 0, then the conditional probability measure µD [ · |E] has ◦-FKG.

    We closely follow [LO24, Theorem 2.8] and [GL25, Proposition 4.9]. The reader may
choose to skip this technical proof on a first read. We focus on the case # = +; the proof
of the other case is identical. The proof of ◦-FKG follows from the following lemma which
is proved below.
Lemma 15.5. Fix a domain D and a lattice event E such that µ+       D [E] > 0. Then, all of the
following hold true in the conditional measure ν := µ+   D [ · |E].
   (i) The weights of σ◦ satisfy the FKG lattice condition, which implies the FKG inequality
       for σ◦ [FKG71].
  (ii) Conditional on σ◦ , the percolations ω + and ω − are independent.
 (iii) Conditional on σ◦ , the law of ω + satisfies the FKG inequality.
 (iv) The conditional law of ω + is stochastically increasing in σ◦ .
  (v) Conditional on σ◦ , the law of ω − satisfies the FKG inequality.
 (vi) The conditional law of ω − is stochastically decreasing in σ◦ .
   Before proving the lemma, let us derive the FKG inequality.

Proof of Proposition 15.4. As mentioned, we focus on the + case. Fix D and E such that
µ+D [E] > 0 and set ν = µD [ · |E]. We apply the so-called tower property for the FKG
                           +

inequality.
     Lemma 15.5(ii)–(vi) implies that conditionally on σ◦ , the pair (ω + , −ω − ) satisfies
the FKG inequality, and that the conditional law of the pair (ω + , −ω − ) is stochastically
increasing in σ◦ .
     Now, let X and Y denote two bounded ◦-increasing functions. Assert that

   ν[XY ] = ν[ν[XY |σ◦ ]] ≥ ν[ν[X|σ◦ ]ν[Y |σ◦ ]] ≥ ν[ν[X|σ◦ ]]ν[ν[Y |σ◦ ]] = ν[X]ν[Y ].   (259)

This standard trick (see [LO24]) is proved as follows. The tower property implies the two
equalities. The first inequality is the conditional FKG of the pair (ω + , −ω − ). Since the
law of (ω + , −ω − ) is stochastically increasing in σ◦ , we see that ν[X|σ◦ ] and ν[Y |σ◦ ] are
increasing functions of σ◦ . The second inequality then follows from the FKG inequality for
σ◦ (Lemma 15.5(i)).

Proof of Lemma 15.5. We omit the subscript and write σ = σ◦ . To prove the lemma, we
first find an appropriate decomposition of ν and then derive the items one by one.

                                              62
Step 1: Decomposition of ν. Since E = {ω|Q = ζ} ∩ {σ|B = τ } has positive probability,
the edge set Q may be written as the disjoint union
                                            Q+ ∪ Q − ∪ Q ∅ ,                                   (260)
where Q∅ = {ζ = 0} and where τ is equal to +1 on the endpoints of Q+ and to −1 on the
endpoints of Q− . Without loss of generality, ∂D ⊂ Q+ . Inserting the indicator functions
for the conditioning event in the expression of Lemma 14.9 yields
                                                            +                        −
            ν[(σ, ω̄)] ∝ 1[σ|B = τ ] · c#A(σ) · 2f (ω ) Y+ (σ, ω + ) · 2f (ω ) Y− (σ, ω − );   (261)
where
               Y± (σ, ω ± ) := 1[Q± ⊂ ω ± ]1[ω ± ∩ Q∅ = ∅]1[ω ± ⊂ A± (σ)]
                                                ±       ±                        ±       ±     (262)
                                     · ( c1 )#(ω ∩(A (σ)\Q)) (1 − c1 )#((A (σ)\Q)\ω ) .

Step 2: Proof of (ii). For fixed σ, the above weight may be written as a product of
one factor depending only on ω + , and one depending only on ω − . This implies the desired
independence.

Step 3: Proof of (i). Proving (i) is the most delicate part of the argument; once
it is established, the remaining claims follow easily. To compute the weight of a spin
configuration σ, we must sum over ω + and ω − in Equation (261). Since in this expression
          +                                              −
only 2f (ω ) Y+ (σ, ω + ) depends on ω + , and only 2f (ω ) Y− (σ, ω − ) on ω − , the sums may be
carried out separately. This is almost the same for ω + and ω − . We first focus on ω + , and
then explain how to adapt the argument for ω − .
    The key idea is the following. Conditional on σ, the percolation configuration ω +
behaves like the dual of a random-cluster model on F• (D) with cluster weight q = 2,
corresponding to an Ising model on the odd faces via the Edwards–Sokal coupling. The
law and partition function of both the random-cluster model and the Ising model are well
understood, and this correspondence allows us to verify the claims below. For completeness,
we give full detail.
    Introduce the couplings
                                        
                                        1
                                               uv ∗ ∈ Q± ,
                                ±
                               auv (σ) = 1/c uv ∗ ∈ A± (σ) \ Q,                             (263)
                                                otherwise.
                                        
                                           0
                                        

and the Ising model (on F• (D)) partition function ZIsing (a) with couplings a defined by
                                    X         Y
                     ZIsing (a) =                   (auv )1[σ̃(u)̸=σ̃(v)] .           (264)
                                     σ̃∈{±1}F• (D) uv∈E• (D)

Our objective is to compute               f (ω + ) Y (σ, ω + ). First, rewrite
                                P
                                   ω+ 2             +
                                      +
                                                     X
                                 2f (ω ) = 2                    1[σ̃ ⊥ ω + ],                  (265)
                                              σ̃∈{±1}F• (D)

where σ̃ ⊥ ω + means that σ̃ is constant on each connected component of R2 \ ω + . The
prefactor two on the right compensates for the unbounded face counted in f (ω + ). Inserting
the previous formula and exchanging the sums yields
                           +
                  X                            X       X
                      2f (ω ) Y+ (σ, ω + ) = 2               Y+ (σ, ω + ).             (266)
                   ω+                               σ̃∈{±1}F• (D) ω + , σ̃⊥ω +


                                                      63
Although the expression for Y+ is lengthy, the inner sum (over ω + ⊥ σ̃) is easy to compute.
In fact, the indicators and the requirement ω + ⊥ σ̃ simply tell us that some edges must be
open or closed. The sum over the remaining edges can be performed independently. By
carrying out this computation, carefully bookkeeping the conditions on ω + , one obtains
                                    +
                           X
                               2f (ω ) Y+ (σ, ω + ) = 2ZIsing (a+ (σ)),                (267)
                            ω+

   Similarly, one obtains
                                       −
                            X
                                  2f (ω ) Y− (σ, ω − ) = ZIsing (a− (σ))                    (268)
                             ω−

(contrary to Equation (267), we do not need the prefactor two, as the unbounded face of
R2 \ ω − intersects F• (D) and therefore its sign is already accounted for). Putting the two
expressions together yields

      ν[{σ}] ∝ 1[σ|∂D ≡ +] · 1[σ|B = τ ] · c#A(σ) · ZIsing (a+ (σ)) · ZIsing (a− (σ)).      (269)

We now verify that each factor satisfies the FKG lattice condition:

                                 g(σ ∨ σ ′ )g(σ ∧ σ ′ ) ≥ g(σ)g(σ ′ ),                      (270)

where σ ∨ σ ′ and σ ∧ σ ′ denote the pointwise maximum and minimum of σ and σ ′ .
    The first two factors trivially satisfy the condition as they are constant (recall that we
are interested in configurations with positive ν = νD  +
                                                         [·|E]). The third one is classical: the
map σ 7→ c  #A(σ) corresponds to ferromagnetic Ising interactions and it is straightforward
to check the desired inequality. We now handle ZIsing (a± (σ)). We focus on +, the case −
being similar. The definition of a+ (Equation (263)) and the inequality c ≥ 1 imply that
                      ′                    ′                     ′                    ′
            a+              +         +
             uv (σ ∨ σ ) ≥ auv (σ) ∨ auv (σ );         a+              +         +
                                                        uv (σ ∧ σ ) = auv (σ) ∧ auv (σ ).   (271)

Suppose now for a second that the map

                                           a 7→ ZIsing (a)                                  (272)

satisfies the FKG lattice condition over a ∈ [0, 1]E• (D) . Since ZIsing (a) is increasing in a,
Equation (271) and the FKG lattice condition for (272) imply the desired Equation (270)
for g(σ) = ZIsing (a+ (σ)). The FKG lattice condition for Equation (272) is classical (after
renormalising the partition function in a way that does not affect the FKG lattice condition),
and may be found in [Frö82, Equations (35), (36), (38)], [Cha98, Proposition A.1], [LO24,
Lemma 6.1 and Equation (7)], or [GL25].
    We have established that all factors satisfy the FKG lattice condition, and therefore
the same holds true for their product ν[{σ}]. By [FKG71], this implies that σ satisfies the
FKG property under ν. This completes the proof of (i).

Proof of (iii)–(vi). Let us start with (iii) and (v). Conditionally on σ, the percolation
ω + is the dual of a random-cluster model with cluster weight q = 2, which is well-known to
satisfy the FKG inequality. The same holds true for ω − .
    We now prove (iv); (vi) being derived similarly. Conditionally on σ, the coupling
constants of the random-cluster model are encoded in a+ (σ). Notice that a+ (σ) (the inverse
of the coupling strengths) is increasing in σ. This means that law of ω + , which is the
dual of the random-cluster model, is stochastically increasing in σ. This proves (iv) and
concludes the proof.

                                                  64
    We now state a classical consequence of the monotonicity properties established above,
enabling to “push” domains “away”, and to compare boundary conditions. It is used to
circumvent the lack of independence in the model. Similar statements can be found in
the theory of Ising and random-cluster models. This result will play a central role in the
probabilistic analysis of the spin configuration that follows.

Corollary 15.6 (Monotonicity in domains and boundary conditions). Consider two even
domains D ⊂ B as well as a bounded ◦-increasing random variable X. Then

                                 µ−        −        +        +
                                  D [X] ≤ µB [X] ≤ µB [X] ≤ µD [X].                      (273)

Proof. Let M be an even domain containing B which is so big that ∂B does not intersect
∂M. Then the two events {∂B ⊂ ω ± } have a positive probability in µ+
                                                                    M . We claim that

                                 µ+        +          +     +
                                  B [X] = µM [X|∂B ⊂ ω ] ≥ µM [X].                       (274)

Indeed, the equality is the Markov property, and the inequality is the FKG inequality. This
proves the claim. Similarly, we get

                                 µ−        +          −     +
                                  B [X] = µM [X|∂B ⊂ ω ] ≤ µM [X],                       (275)

leading to
                                          µ−        +
                                           B [X] ≤ µB [X].                               (276)

The other inequalities in the statement of the lemma are similar; for example, on the right
side, we obtain
                            µ+        +            +     +
                             B [X] ≤ µB [X|∂D ⊂ ω ] = µD [X].                         (277)

This proves the lemma.


16     Percolation estimates for the spin configuration
From now on, we shall consistently write

             [[n]] := [−n, n];                   [[n × m]] := [−n, n] × [−m, m];         (278)
             Balln := [[n × n]];                  Balln (x) := Balln +x;                 (279)
             AnnulusR,r := BallR \ Ballr ;        AnnulusR,r (x) := AnnulusR,r +x.       (280)

   A rectangle is a subset of R2 of the form R = [[a × b]] + x. Its four sides (closed line
segments which are subsets of ∂R) are denoted RightR , TopR , LeftR , and BottomR in the
obvious way.


16.1    Percolation events associated with the spin representation
Recall that we view ω + and ω − as random subsets of R2 (each edge is viewed as the
closed line segment between its two endpoints). Our objective is to understand the random
geometry of ω̄ = (ω + , ω − ). In this section we define some useful percolation events: first
“simple” events (defined in terms of either ω + or ω − ), then “alternating” events (defined in
terms of both ω + and ω − ).

                                                65
                                                                           D
            Figure 11: An element of the generic percolation event {A ←
                                                                      → B}




        Figure 12: Elements of Hor(R), Ver(R), Circuit(D \ H), and Arm(D \ H)

Definition 16.1 (Simple percolation events). Define
                      D
                 → B} := {S ⊂ R2 : S ∩ D contains a path from A to B};
              {A ←                                                                      (281)
see Figure 11. Define the horizontal and vertical crossings of rectangles to be the sets
                                                  R
                                Hor(R) := {LeftR ←
                                                 → RightR };                            (282)
                                                  R
                                Ver(R) := {TopR ←
                                                → BottomR }.                            (283)
If A ⊂ R2 is a topological annulus, define the circuit and arm events
 Circuit(A) := {S ⊂ R2 : S ∩ A contains a non-contractible circuit in R2 \ A};          (284)
    Arm(A) := {S ⊂ R : S ∩ A has a path connecting the boundary components of A}.
                            2

                                                                              (285)
See Figure 12 for an illustration of all four events we just defined.

Remark 16.2 (Combining circuit events). Circuit events are versatile as they can be
combined to create (horizontal or vertical) crossings (see Figure 13); for example, for k ≥ 1,
we have
               k−1
               \
                   Circuit(Annulus2,1 ((2i, 0))) ⊂ Hor([−1, 2k − 1] × [1, 2]).           (286)
                i=0
They can also be combined to create more complicated percolation events. For example,
for r ∈ Z≥1 , we may find a subset Z ⊂ R2 of cardinal #Z = 4r such that
                   \
                       Circuit(Annulus2,1 (z)) ⊂ Circuit(Annulusr+1,r ).        (287)
                      z∈Z


                                             66
          Figure 13: Jointly the three circuits imply the crossing of the rectangle.


It is often quite straightforward (but technically tedious) to construct a set Z whose cardinal
is optimal up to a constant factor. In those cases, rather than giving a precise definition of
Z, we leave the choice to the reader, and refer to this remark instead.

Definition 16.3 (Alternating percolation events). For the following definitions, let R
denote the set
                    {(S+ , S− ) : S+ , S− ⊂ R2 and S+ ∩ S− = ∅}.                  (288)
We now introduce our events; R is a rectangle, and A is a topological annulus.
  • AltHor2k (R) consists of the elements (S+ , S− ) ∈ R such that LeftR contains 2k
    distinct vertices
                                       − + −                  + −
                                 s+
                                  1 , s1 , s2 , s2 , . . . , sk , sk            (289)

     appearing in descending order, such that each s#       i is path-connected to RightR via a
     path in S# ∩ R.
   • AltVer2k (R) is defined identically: it consists of the elements (S+ , S− ) ∈ R such that
                                                  − + −                  + −
     TopR contains 2k distinct vertices s+   1 , s1 , s2 , s2 , . . . , sk , sk appearing from left to
     right, such that each s#i is path-connected to BottomR via a path in S# ∩ R.
   • AltCircuit2k (A) contains the elements (S+ , S− ) ∈ R such that we may find 2k disjoint
     circuits of A, ordered from outside to inside, and where the circuits are alternately
     contained in S+ and S− with the first circuit belonging to S+ .
   • AltArm2k (A) is defined similarly; in this case, the arms are circularly ordered, but
     not ordered; there is no notion of topmost, leftmost, or outermost crossing or circuit.
See Figure 14 for an illustration.
    We will use these definitions for different sets. We therefore add the following notation.
    For any random subset α of R2 , write Horα (R) := {α ∈ Hor(R)}, and similarly for
other events. If α is a random subset of F (Z2 ), then we think of α as being a subset of
R2 defined by the union of all line segments connecting centres of nearest-neighbour faces
belonging to α ⊂ F (Z2 ).
    Suppose now that ᾱ = (α+ , α− ) is a random pair of percolations. Finally, for each of
the four events defined above, we introduce two more notations. Like above, introduce
                           ᾱ
                     AltHor2k (R) := {ᾱ ∈ AltHor2k (R)},                                      (290)
                              ᾱ
                    #AltHor (R) := max{2k ∈ 2Z≥0 : ᾱ ∈ AltHor2k (R)}.                         (291)

These notations naturally adapt to the other three events.


16.2    Circuit estimate for the spin configuration
Percolation theory has seen remarkable progress over the past sixty years. For planar
Bernoulli percolation, it was shown in the 1980s [SW78; Rus78] (see also [KT25] and

                                                 67
Figure 14: Elements of AltHor4 (R), AltVer4 (R), AltCircuit4 (D \ H), and AltArm4 (D \ H).
Full lines depict ω + ; dotted lines ω − .


references therein) that at criticality, rectangles with a fixed aspect ratio have crossing
probabilities – that is, the probability that the percolation configuration contains a connected
component crossing the rectangle – that remain uniformly bounded away from both 0
and 1 as the size of the rectangle tends to infinity. This reflects the fact that connected
components in the critical regime qualitatively exhibit scale-free behaviour and possess
fractal-like geometric properties.
    Originally developed for Bernoulli percolation, the Russo–Seymour–Welsh (RSW) theory
has become indispensable in the analysis of critical phenomena. Over the past fifteen years,
the theory has been significantly extended to encompass many dependent percolation
models [DHN11; DST17; DT15; DTT18; DMT21; DT19; Lam23; KT23]. In this broader
context, particular attention must be paid to the dependence between the configuration
inside a given rectangle and its exterior. To be applicable, crossing estimates must therefore
be uniform with respect to boundary conditions.
    When studying the emergence of large connected components, an especially convenient
geometric setting is that of an annulus rather than a rectangle. In this setting, one asks
whether the percolation configuration contains a path that remains within the annulus and
encircles its inner boundary. We adopt this annular framework throughout the present
section.
    The subsection states the key RSW-type input for our percolation-type arguments. The
theorem below yields that ω − satisfies RSW-type estimates, even when boundary conditions
are least favourable (that is, + boundary conditions).
    For any rectangle R, we shall write µ+     R for µD , where D is the largest even domain
                                                       +

whose face centres are all contained in R.

Theorem 16.4 (Circuit estimate). There exists a constant ccircuit > 0 (independent of
c ∈ [1, 2]) such that for any r ∈ [4, ∞) and x ∈ R2 ,
                                           −
                       µ+
                        Ball2r (x) [Circuit
                                           ω
                                             (Annulus2r,r (x))] ≥ ccircuit .              (292)

The same inequality remains true with + and − interchanged.

    The result tells us that ω − -circuits have a uniformly positive probability of appearing,
even with the worst possible boundary conditions (in the sense of increasing functions).
The uniformity in boundary conditions renders the result very flexible.
    The theorem was first proved in [Dum+24, Theorem 1.4]. The article uses an input
coming from the Bethe Ansatz to derive certain crossing estimates, then uses the FKG
inequality (for the absolute value of the height function) to turn these crossing estimates
into circuit estimates.

                                                68
    A second proof not relying on the Bethe Ansatz was given in [GL25], via a renormalisation
inequality. This technique was first used in [DST17] in the context of the random-cluster
model. The renormalisation inequality essentially asserts that if the theorem is false, then
the circuit probability decays exponentially fast in the radius r, which in turn implies that
the model is localised (contradicting the known delocalisation).
    We now turn to the proof. While Theorem 16.4 is essentially identical to [Dum+24,
Theorem 1.4]; the two theorems are stated in slightly different settings. We will now
“translate” [Dum+24, Theorem 1.4] into Theorem 16.4. The reader may choose to skip this
technical proof on a first read. We start with a lemma.
    Recall that the event AltCircuitω̄20 (Annulus2n,n ) means that the annulus contains 20
circuits which (from outside to inside) alternately belong to ω + , ω − , ω + , etc.

Lemma 16.5. There exist constants c > 0 and N ∈ Z≥0 (both independent of c ∈ [1, 2])
such that for every n ≥ N ,

                          µ+                     ω̄
                           Ball(2n+2) [AltCircuit20 (Annulus2n,n )] ≥ c.                    (293)

Proof. The first translation problem stems from the fact that boundary conditions are
enforced differently in [Dum+24]. In [Dum+24], boundary conditions are imposed on the
heights of an F (Z2 )-path of adjacent faces, as opposed to an F◦ -path of diagonally adjacent
even faces which is what we do here.
    Fix n ∈ Z≥0 and let Dn denote the largest even domain whose face centres are contained
in Ball(2n+2) . Let γ n denote the self-avoiding F (Dn )-circuit which surrounds the largest
area (this path alternately visits even and odd faces). It is straightforward to see that, as a
subset of R2 , Ball2n is surrounded by γ n .
    Since each face visited by γ n lies on ∂Dn or is adjacent to it, we have

                                 µ+
                                  Ball(2n+2) [{|h|γ | ≤ 1}] = 1.
                                                   n                                        (294)

This is good news, because the conditional measure µ+   Ball(2n+2) [ · | h|γ ] has boundary condi-
                                                                            n

tions like in [Dum+24]. We may now directly apply [Dum+24, Theorem 1.4] with ℓ = 1
and k = 100, to find a constant c > 0 such that for sufficiently large n,
                                h                                       i
                                         {h≥100}
                    µ+
                     Ball(2n+2)   Circuit        (Annulus 2n,n ) h| γ n   ≥ c.               (295)

In particular,
                                             {h≥100}
                         µ+
                          Ball(2n+2) [Circuit        (Annulus2n,n )] ≥ c.                   (296)

Since Annulus2n,n contains a circuit of {h ≤ 10} almost surely, the intermediate value
theorem asserts that we may find ω k -circuits at heights k = 12, 14, . . . , 98 in the annulus.
This implies the claim since the circuits alternately belong to ω + and ω − .

Proof of Theorem 16.4. Let N and c be provided by Lemma 16.5. We distinguish two cases:
either r ≤ N or r > N .

Step 1: the case r ≤ N . In any measure µ+     D , every edge not incident to ∂D is ω -open
                                                                                     −

with some uniformly positive probability η > 0 independent of D and the chosen edge.
Thus, using the FKG inequality for ω − , a uniform lower bound is given by η M where M is
the supremum over the minimal circuit lengths within annuli with r ≤ N .

                                               69
Step 2: the case r > N . Without loss of generality, x ∈ [−2, 2]2 . Let n = ⌈r⌉. Then

                   AltCircuitω̄20 (Annulus2n,n ) ⊂ AltCircuitω̄2 (Annulus2r,r (x)).        (297)

Thus, the claim implies that

                          µ+                     ω̄
                           Ball(2n+2) [AltCircuit2 (Annulus2r,r (x))] ≥ c.                 (298)

Let γ denote the largest self-avoiding ω + -circuit in the annulus above (or γ := ∅ if such a
circuit does not exist), and let Dγ ⊂ Ball2r (x) denote the corresponding even domain (so
that ∂Dγ = γ). By the tower property and the Markov property, we have

  µ+                     ω̄
   Ball(2n+2) [AltCircuit2 (Annulus2r,r (x))]
                              Z
                                                ω−
                            =      µ+Dγ [Circuit                        Ball(2n+2) [γ] ≥ c. (299)
                                                   (Annulus2r,r (x))] dµ+
                               {γ̸=∅}

                     −
Since µ+D [Circuit
                  ω
                    (Annulus2r,r (x))] is increasing in D and Dγ ⊂ Ball2r (x) almost surely,
we get from Corollary 15.6 that
                                                −
                            µ+
                             Ball2r (x) [Circuit
                                                ω
                                                  (Annulus2r,r (x))] ≥ c.                  (300)

This concludes the proof of the second step. Taken together, the two steps establish the
theorem with ccircuit := η M ∧ c.

   We record an easy consequence of the previous theorem together with the FKG inequality.
This statement will prove convenient later on.

Corollary 16.6 (Circuit estimate). For any r ∈ [4, ∞) and x ∈ R2 , and for any even
domain D such that ∂D surrounds Ball2r (x), we have
                                         −
                            µ+
                             D [Circuit
                                       ω
                                         (Annulus2r,r (x))|E] ≥ ccircuit                   (301)

for any event E that is measurable in terms of the even spins and edges which do not
intersect Ball2r (x). The same inequality remains true with ω − replaced by ω + .

Proof. The event E may be written as a partition of finitely many ◦-lattice events which are
measurable in terms of the even spins and edges which do not intersect Ball2r (x). Without
loss of generality, we may assume that E itself is of this type. Let γ ⊂ E◦ denote the
boundary of the largest even domain in Ball2r (x). By the FKG inequality (Proposition 15.4)
for µ+
     D [ · |E], we get
               −                                         −
  µ+
   D [Circuit
             ω
               (Annulus2r,r (x))|E] ≥ µ+
                                       D [Circuit
                                                 ω
                                                   (Annulus2r,r (x))|E ∩ {γ ⊂ ω + }]       (302)
                                                             ω−
                                        = µ+
                                           Ball2r (x) [Circuit    (Annulus2r,r (x))]       (303)
                                        > ccircuit .                                       (304)

The equality is just the Markov property; the inequality on the right is Theorem 16.4.


17    Full-plane spin representation (incl. Theorem 4.10)
The previous circuit estimate enables us to define a full plane analogue of the spin repre-
sentation.

                                                    70
17.1    Definition in the full plane
We define an infinite volume version of our spin representation. We also show that the
properties obtained in finite volume extend to the infinite volume setting. Introduce the set

                              ΩZ2 := {±}F◦ × {0, 1}E◦ × {±}F•                          (305)

Theorem 17.1 (Full-plane limit). There exists a unique probability measure µZ2 on ΩZ2
such that for any random variable X measurable in terms of finitely many spins and edges,
                                               −
                             lim µ+
                                  D [X] = lim µD [X] = µZ2 [X].                        (306)
                            D↗Z2             D↗Z2

Moreover, µZ2 satisfies the following properties:
  (i) R2 \ ω contains µZ2 -almost surely no unbounded connected components.
 (ii) Conditional spin flip property for σ • (analogous to Lemma 14.7),
(iii) Markov property (analogous to Lemma 14.12),
 (iv) Markov property for polar domains (analogous to Lemma 14.13),
  (v) FKG inequality (analogous to Proposition 15.4),
 (vi) Circuit estimate (analogous to Corollary 16.6).
Remark 17.2. We have not yet proved well-definedness of PZ2 (Theorem 2.2). This is
done later, in Section 18, where we also prove that the law of the gradient of h in µZ2 is
precisely PZ2 . This motivates our interest in the measure µZ2 .
   Before proving Theorem 17.1, we introduce a lemma.
                                     −
Lemma 17.3. The measures µ+   D and µD restricted to even spins and edges converge to the
same limit, which we denote µZ2 ,◦ .
Proof. Corollary 15.6 implies that for any ◦-increasing positive random variable X which is
measurable in terms of finitely many spins and edges, the limits

                          ℓ− := lim µ−
                                     D [X];           ℓ+ := lim µ+
                                                                 D [X]                 (307)
                                 D↗Z2                        D↗Z2

are well-defined (respectively as increasing and decreasing sequences) and satisfy ℓ− ≤ ℓ+ .
It therefore suffices to prove the other inequality ℓ+ ≤ ℓ− . This will be done by showing
that even under µ+  D [X], there is a probability tending to 1 as D tends to Z (this uses
                                                                                2

Corollary 16.6) that there is a circuit in ω surrounding the vertices that serve to measure
                                            −

X.
    More formally, fix r ≥ 4 so large that X is measurable in terms of the spins and edges
                                                 −
in Ballr−2 . Define the event An,m := Circuitω (Ball2m r \ Ball2n r ). Fix m ∈ Z≥0 . If D is
an even domain whose perimeter surrounds Ball2m r , then Corollary 16.6 implies that

                                µ+                   c
                                 D [An,n+1 |(An+1,m ) ] ≥ ccircuit                     (308)

for any n = 0, 1, . . . , m − 1. By induction, this yields

                                µ+                              m
                                 D [A0,m ] ≥ 1 − (1 − ccircuit ) .                     (309)

The right-hand side tends to 1 as m → ∞. Let γ m denotes the largest self-avoiding
ω − -circuit contributing to A0,m (if the event occurs), and set γ m := ∅ otherwise. Then
                                        Z
                        +
                       µD [1A0,m · X] =         µ−           + m
                                                  Dγ m [X] dµD [γ ] ≤ ℓ
                                                                       −
                                                                                       (310)
                                          {γ m ̸=∅}


                                                71
where Dγ m is the even domain whose boundary is γ m . The identity is the Markov property,
and the inequality is again Corollary 15.6. If we first take D ↗ Z2 and then m → ∞, the
left-hand side converges to ℓ+ , proving the desired inequality. This finishes the proof of the
lemma.

Proof of Theorem 17.1. By reasoning as for the proof of the previous lemma, we observe
that Corollary 16.6 implies that µZ2 ,◦ -almost surely all connected components of R2 \ ω are
bounded. Lemma 14.7 therefore extends to the full-plane limit, and µZ2 may simply be
obtained from µZ2 ,◦ by flipping coins for the odd spins σ • in each connected component of
R2 \ ω. The properties stated in the result now immediately follow (by passing to the limit)
                                  −
from the properties of µ+D and µD .



17.2    Flip domination (Theorem 4.10)
Now that the infinite-volume measure is defined, we derive the flip domination property en
passant. (In fact, we only formally prove that the law of h in µZ2 and PZ2 is the same in
Lemma 18.7.)

Proof of Theorem 4.10. The proof is illustrated by Figure 15. Fix the F (Z2 )-circuit γ, and
define Fγ as in the statement of the theorem. Fix n ∈ 2Z. It suffices to prove that, for any
even domain D containing γ, and for any positive probability event E ⊂ {h|γ ≤ n} that is
measurable in terms of h|F (D)\Fγ , the height function 2n − hFγ stochastically dominates
h|Fγ under µ+ D [ · |D].
    The idea is to simply explore the outermost ωn -loops within γ. Such loops may intersect
γ; this is not a problem. Conditional on this exploration:
    • The unrevealed heights (surrounded by ωn -loop) are flip-symmetric around n,
    • The revealed heights are at most n.
This implies the desired stochastic domination.


18     Torus and cylinder spin representation (Theorem 2.2)
This section adapts the analysis developed above to the settings of the torus and the cylinder.
While no essential difficulties arise, special care is required in defining the corresponding
measures so as to preserve the FKG property. For completeness, we present the relevant
results below.




Figure 15: Flip domination: perfect flip symmetry around the height n in the unexplored
region; heights at most n in the explored region.


                                              72
18.1    Definitions on the torus
We want to replace fixed boundary conditions outside some even domain D by periodic
boundary conditions on the cylinder TM,L defined in the introduction. The graphs F (TM,L ),
F◦ (TM,L ), and F• (TM,L ) are defined in the obvious way, in analogy with their definitions
for D in Section 14.

Definition 18.1 (Torus spin measure). For any torus TM,L , let Ω = ΩTM,L denote the
sample space
                  Ω := {±}F◦ (TM,L ) × {0, 1}E◦ (TM,L ) × {±}F• (TM,L ) .     (311)
A typical element is denoted by (σ◦ , ω, σ• ). We often identify ω with the set {ω = 1} ⊂
E◦ (TM,L ), and use the standard percolation terminology. Introduce a new, special event

    E8 := {the height gain of h along any closed F (TM,L )-circuit, belongs to 8Z}.        (312)

Define the probability measure µTM,L on (σ◦ , ω, σ• ) ∈ Ω by

  µTM,L [(σ◦ , ω, σ• )] ∝ 1[(σ◦ , σ• ) ∈ E8 ] · 1[ω ⊂ A(σ◦ )]                              (313)
                               · 1[xy ∈ ω or xy ∗ ∈ A(σ• ) (or both) for any xy ∈ E◦ (TM,L )]
                                                                                         (314)
                                                 #ω            #(A(σ◦ )\ω)
                               · c#A(σ◦ ) · c1      · 1 − c1                             (315)
                                                            
                                                                           .

Remark 18.2. Compare Definition 18.1 with Definition 14.5. The only difference is that
we dropped the first two indicators in Equation (238) (related to the boundary conditions
on ∂D) and inserted an indicator for the event E8 (which constrains the height gain on
loops which wind nontrivially around the torus).

Remark 18.3. Samples from µTM,L are naturally interpreted as six-vertex configurations
on TM,L , but the induced law is not given by the measure PTM,L defined in the introduction.
The reasons are as follows. In PTM,L , with positive probability, the arrow configuration
induces a height gain in 2Z \ 4Z along some nontrivial loops. For the spin representation to
be well-defined, the height gain along nontrivial loops must lie in 4Z, but in the previous
definition we further constrain the height gain to belong to 8Z (via the event E8 ). This is
done to make the FKG inequality work (this is discussed below in further detail).

18.2    Markov property and the FKG inequality on the torus
Let us first state a Markov property. The maps πD and πD c are defined the same as before.

The proof is identical to the original proof (Lemma 14.12).

Lemma 18.4 (Torus Markov property). Consider a torus TM,L and an even domain D
such that (as a subset of TM,L ) ∂D is a contractible self-avoiding circuit in F◦ (TM,L ). For
# ∈ {±},
   • The laws µTM,L [ · |{∂D ⊂ ω # }] of πD (σ◦ , ω̄, σ• ) and µ#
                                                                D of (σ◦ , ω̄, σ• ) are the same,
   • The random variables πD and πD    c are independent in µ                         #
                                                                  TM,L [ · |{∂D ⊂ ω }].

   We also mention an FKG inequality.

Lemma 18.5 (Torus FKG inequality). Consider a torus TM,L and an ◦-lattice event E. If
µTM,L [E] > 0, then the conditional probability measure µTM,L [ · |E] has ◦-FKG.

                                                  73
Proof. The proof is entirely the same as the original proof (Proposition 15.4). There is,
however, one critical point where we should pay attention. The decomposition into two
independent Ising models is a bit more complicated due to the nontrivial topology. One
may work out, however, that the decomposition in Equation (261) remains valid on the
torus for the measure µTM,L defined above (one should only replace the ambient space R2
by (R/LZ) × (R/M Z) when counting the number of connected components). Crucially,
Equation (261) remains valid thanks to the event E8 in Definition 18.1, and would fail
otherwise. We refer to [GL25, Section 5] for details.

18.3     Circuit estimates on the torus
With the Markov property and the FKG inequality, we can essentially bring back our
measures to the finite domain setup discussed before. Let us now describe how to do this.

Lemma 18.6 (Torus circuit estimate). Fix M, L. Then, for any 4 ≤ r < (M ∧ L)/4 and
x ∈ R2 ,
                                 −
                  µTM,L [Circuitω (Annulus2r,r (x))|E] ≥ ccircuit             (316)
for any event E that is measurable in terms of the even spins and edges which do not
intersect Ball2r (x). The same inequality remains true with ω − replaced by ω + .

Proof. The proof is identical to the proof of Corollary 16.6.

18.4     Definition and main properties on the cylinder
Recall the definitions of CylL and PCylL . The graphs F (CylL ), F◦ (CylL ), and F• (CylL ) are
defined in the obvious way, in analogy with their definitions for D and TM,L .

Lemma 18.7 (Torus limits). All of the following statements hold true.
 (i) Full-plane limit. For any random variable X which is measurable in terms of finitely
     many spins and edges,
                                  lim µTM,L [X] = µZ2 [X],                         (317)
                                    M,L→∞

      where µZ2 is the measure defined in Section 14 (Theorem 17.1).
 (ii) Cylinder limit. For any L ∈ 2Z≥1 , there exists a probability measure µCylL on the
      sample space

                       ΩCylL := {±}F◦ (CylL ) × {0, 1}E◦ (CylL ) × {±}F• (CylL )         (318)

       such that for any random variable X which is measurable in terms of finitely many
       spins and edges,
                                   lim µTM,L [X] = µCylL [X].                       (319)
                                    M →∞

      Moreover, all of the following are true:
        • The Markov property (Lemma 18.4) passes to the limit,
        • The FKG inequality (Lemma 18.5) passes to the limit,
        • The circuit estimate (Lemma 18.6) passes to the limit,
        • The conditional spin flip property for σ • (Lemma 14.7) holds true,
        • As a measure on six-vertex configurations, µCylL equals PCylL .
(iii) Full-plane as a limit of cylinder measures. We have

                                       lim µCylL [X] = µZ2 [X]                           (320)
                                      L→∞


                                               74
       for any random variable X which is measurable in terms of finitely many spins and
       edges, due to the first item. If X is also measurable in terms of h, then we furthermore
       have
                                   lim µCylL [X] = µZ2 [X] = EZ2 [X].                      (321)
                                  L→∞

       In particular, Theorem 2.2 holds true.

Proof. The proof of the first item is identical to the proof of Theorem 17.1: one simply uses
the circuit estimate (Lemma 18.6) and the Markov property (Lemma 18.4) to compare the
measure µTM,L with the measure µ+    D for a large enough even domain D.
    The third items clearly follows from the first two since the limit in the first item may
be taken in any order. We therefore focus on the second item.
    Recall from the introduction that {balanced} denotes the event that a configuration is
balanced, meaning that in each column of horizontal arrows, half of the arrows point to the
left and the other half to the right. This event constrains the global topology, and equals
the event that the height gain along any closed F (CylL )-circuit that winds in the vertical
direction, but not the horizontal direction, equals 0. The limit

                                    lim µTM,L [ · |{balanced}]                            (322)
                                   M →∞

is well-defined and equal to PCylL since we are essentially dealing with a recurrent Markov
chain. We must therefore prove that {balanced} has high probability in the M → ∞ limit.
    We now make one observation. If for some n ∈ Z, the slice [n, n + 1] × (R/LZ) contains
a nontrivial ω-path, then the gradient of the height function is zero along that path and
therefore the event {balanced} occurs. Write Sn for this event.
    As discussed before, it is easy to find a uniform lower bound η > 0 on the probability
that an edge is ω + -open, even if we condition on the states of all edges not incident to that
edge. This implies that for any k = 0, . . . , M/2 − 1, we have

                        µTM,L [S2k |(S0 ∪ S2 ∪ S4 ∪ · · · ∪ S2k−2 )c ] ≥ η L ,            (323)

and therefore
                            µTM,L [{balanced}] ≥ 1 − (1 − η L )M/2 .                      (324)
The lower bounds clearly tends to 1 as M tends to infinity.
    The first three properties obviously pass to the limit, and the last property was already
proved above. The conditional spin flip property for σ • is not obvious (it is not true on
the torus due to the event E8 ), but it is recovered in the limit thanks to the Markov chain
structure of the six-vertex model on the cylinder.


19      Bounds on crossing counts (Theorem 4.9)
The purpose of this section is to establish a log-linear bound on the number of alternating
rectangle crossings (see the statement below). We also prove the log-quadratic bound on
arm events (Theorem 4.9 in the introduction).

19.1     The rectangle crossings case
We start with a (far from optimal) bound on crossing counts.
    Recall that #AltHorω̄ (R) counts the number of alternating horizontal crossings of the
rectangle R.

                                                 75
Figure 16: Lemma 19.4. Suppose that we want to attach an ω − -percolation to an ω − -open
boundary segment, but we have conditioned on some “messy” event inside the unions of the
domains Di (the shaded area). The lemma tells us that we can still open part of the circuit
which connects to the boundary. The proof uses the Markov property for polar domains to
remove the conditioning on the adverse event.


Lemma 19.1 (Log-linear bound on rectangle crossing counts). There exists a constant
clin ∈ (0, 1) (independent of c ∈ [1, 2]) with the following property. For any n ∈ Z≥0 and
any rectangle R := Jw × ρwK + u, where w ∈ R≥1 and ρ ∈ R≥1 , and u ∈ R2 ,

                        µZ2 [{#AltHorω̄ (R) ≥ 2n}|E] ≤ (1 − cρlin )n ,                  (325)

where E is any event that is measurable in terms of the even spins and edges at a ℓ∞ -distance
at least w/5 of R.
    Moreover, the same bounds hold with µZ2 replaced by µCylL , provided that 2(ρ + 15 )w ≤ L,
and with the understanding that R is now regarded as a rectangle on the cylinder. Analogous
bounds also hold for vertical crossings of the rectangle, both in the full plane and on the
cylinder.

Remark 19.2. Requiring a macroscopic buffer zone between the rectangle and the spins
or edges used to determine E is standard in this type of result. In fact, the conclusion may
fail without such a buffer if E is allowed to depend on all edges and spins outside R.

Remark 19.3. In the context of the lemma, summing over n gives that

                                 µZ2 [#AltHorω̄ (R)|E] ≤ 2c−ρ
                                                           lin .                        (326)

    For the proof of this lemma on rectangle crossings, we first require a strengthened
version of the circuit estimate in which the annulus is allowed to be partially “scarred”,
provided that the boundary conditions induced on the remaining region are favorable. This
variation is illustrated by Figure 16.

Lemma 19.4 (Partial circuit estimate). Fix r ∈ [4, ∞) and x ∈ R2 , and consider the
following setup.
    • Let (Di )i denote a finite family of even domains.
    • Let B denote the set of edges in ∪i ∂Di that are contained in Ball2r (x).
    • Let U := ∪i E◦ (Di ).
Then, for any event E measurable in terms of the even spins and edges contained in U, and
such that µZ2 [E ∩ {B ⊂ ω − }] > 0, we have
                             −
                µZ2 [Circuitω ∪ U (Annulus2r,r (x))|E ∩ {B ⊂ ω − }] ≥ ccircuit .        (327)


Proof. Without loss of generality, E is an ◦-lattice event. Let γ denote the smallest
self-avoiding even circuit surrounding Ball2r (x). By using the FKG inequality, we may

                                               76
Figure 17: When exploring the paths from top to bottom, each time we explore an ω + -
crossing, there is a universally positive probability that this crossing connects to the bottom,
blocking any further horizontal ω + -crossings from appearing.


furthermore assume that E satisfies the following “worst-case” description: γ ⊂ U, and
E ⊂ {γ ⊂ ω + }. We now claim that
                   −
      µZ2 [Circuitω ∪ U (Annulus2r,r (x))|E ∩ {B ⊂ ω − }]                                   (328)
                                      ω− ∪ U
                       = µZ2 [Circuit          (Annulus2r,r (x))|{γ ⊂ ω + } ∩ {B ⊂ ω − }]   (329)
                                      ω−
                       ≥ µZ2 [Circuit      (Annulus2r,r (x))|{γ ⊂ ω + }]                    (330)
                       ≥ ccircuit .                                                         (331)

The equality is the Markov property (Lemma 14.12) and the Markov property for polar
domains (Lemma 14.13). The first inequality is inclusion of events and FKG. The second
inequality is the circuit estimate (Corollary 16.6).

Proof of Lemma 19.1. Define two sequences of paths, as follows:
    • α1+ is the highest horizontal ω + -crossing of R,
    • αi− is the highest horizontal ω − -crossing of R below αi+ , for i = 1, 2, . . .,
                                                                −
    • αi+ is the highest horizontal ω + -crossing of R below αi−1    , for i = 2, 3, . . .,
    • If such a crossing does not exist, we set it (and all subsequent ones) equal to ∅.
Notice that {#AltHorω̄ (R) ≥ 2n} = {αn− ̸= ∅}. For Lemma 19.1, it suffices to prove that
for any i, we have
                           µZ2 [{αi− ̸= ∅}|E ∩ {αi+ ̸= ∅}] ≤ 1 − cρlin                      (332)
for some fixed clin ∈ (0, 1).
    We split into two cases, depending on the value of w. First suppose that w ≤ 1000. Let
η > 0 denote a uniform constant such that the probability that an even spin is + is at least
η, even after conditioning on E and all the other even spins. Then

    µZ2 [{all even spins in R below αi+ are valued +}|E ∩ {αi+ ̸= ∅}] ≥ (η 1000000 )ρ .     (333)

Since this event is disjoint from {αi− ̸= ∅}, any value clin ≤ η 1000000 will work.
    We are left with the (more interesting) case w > 1000. By applying Lemma 19.4 at least
⌊100ρ⌋ times and applying the FKG inequality, we observe that with a µZ2 [ · |E ∩ {αi+ ̸= ∅}]-
probability of at least (c100
                          circuit ) , the path αi is connected to BottomR within the rectangle
                                   ρ            +

(see Remark 16.2 and Figure 17). In this case, it is impossible that the event {αi− ̸= ∅}
occurs.
    This proves that the value clin = η 1000000 ∧ c100circuit works.


                                                   77
Figure 18: Illustration of the reduction from annulus arms to rectangle crossings. Each
arm also crosses one of the four rectangles R1 , R2 , R3 , and R4 in the “easy” direction.


19.2     The annulus arms case
We now adapt the previous results to the context of arms crossing an annulus. For r ∈ R≥4 ,
R ∈ R≥2r , and x ∈ R2 , define the random variable

       KR,r,x := (1 − 1AltCircuit2ω̄ (AnnulusR,r (x)) ) ∨ #AltArmω̄ (AnnulusR−1,r+1 (x)),   (334)

which, roughly speaking, counts alternating crossings from inside to outside in the annulus.
Notice that this random variable is measurable with respect to the even edges which are
entirely contained in AnnulusR,r (x).

Lemma 19.5 (Linear bound on arm exponents). There exists a constant c′arm > 0 (inde-
pendent of c ∈ [1, 2]) with the following property. For r ∈ R≥4 , R ∈ R≥2r , x ∈ R2 , and
n ∈ Z≥0 ,
                                                          ′
                             µZ2 [{KR,r,x ≥ n}|E] ≤ (r/R)carm n                      (335)
for any E with µZ2 [E] > 0 that is measurable with respect to the even spins and edges which
do not intersect BallR (x).
    The same bounds hold true if µZ2 is replaced by µCylL , provided that L > 2R.

Remark 19.6. In the context of the lemma, summing over n gives that
                                                             ′
                                                     (r/R)carm
                                   µZ2 [KR,r,x |E] ≤             .                          (336)
                                                     1 − 2−c′arm


Proof. It suffices to consider the case that R = 2m r. We first prove this for m = 1.
    Let us start by proving that with uniformly positive probability, KR,r,x = 0. Since the
event AltCircuitω̄2 (AnnulusR,r (x)) bars any arms from appearing, it suffices to show that
this event occurs with uniformly positive probability. If r ≤ 100 then we may simply choose
two disjoint even circuits in AnnulusR,r (x), and lower bound the probability that they
are open for ω + and ω − (see the part of the proof of Lemma 19.1 where w ≤ 1000). For
r > 100, we may combine 1000 circuit estimates (Corollary 16.6) and the FKG inequality
to show that AltCircuitω̄2 (AnnulusR,r (x)) occurs with probability at least c1000
                                                                              circuit (see also
the part of the proof of Lemma 19.1 where w > 1000).
    To finish the proof for the case that m = 1, it suffices to find constants c > 0 and
N ∈ 20Z≥1000 such that for any n ∈ Z≥1 , we have

                                 µZ2 [{KR,r,x ≥ N n}|E] ≤ e−cn .                            (337)

                                                 78
Observe that any continuous path connecting Ballr (x) to ∂ BallR (x) must necessarily
traverse at least one of the following four rectangles in the “easy” direction:

                           R1 := ([5r/4, 6r/4] × [−7r/4, 7r/4]) + x                            (338)

and its images R2 , R3 , R4 , defined by the rotations by an angle π2 , π, and 3π
                                                                                2 around x.
See Figure 18 for an illustration. In particular, we get

 {KR,r,x ≥ N n} ⊆ AltHorω̄N n (R1 ) ∪ AltVerω̄N n (R2 ) ∪ AltHorω̄N n (R3 ) ∪ AltVerω̄N n (R4 ) (339)
                              10                     10                       10      10


(the division by 10 royally suffices; the safety margin compensates a few crossings that we
may lose by how we set up the definitions). Lemma 19.1 then implies

                           µZ2 [{KR,r,x ≥ N n}|E] ≤ 4(1 − c14
                                                           lin )
                                                                N n/20
                                                                       .                       (340)

It is then straightforward to find good values for c and N . This concludes the case m = 1.
     For the general case m ≥ 1, we notice that

                                   K2m r,r,x ≤      min        K2i+1 r,2i r,x ,                (341)
                                                 i=0,...,m−1

and then use the m = 1 case m times at m disjoint concentric annuli.

   Theorem 4.9 in the introduction is a direct corollary of the following stronger result.
   The random variable KR,r,x was defined in equation (334). The following lemma
improves on Lemma 19.5.
Theorem 19.7 (Quadratic bound on arm exponents). For any c ∈ [1, 2], there exists a
constant carm ∈ (0, 10−9 ) with the following property. For r ∈ R≥4 , R ∈ R≥2r , x ∈ R2 , and
n ∈ Z≥0 ,
                                                                2
                              µZ2 [{KR,r,x ≥ n}|E] ≤ (r/R)carm n                        (342)
for any E that is measurable with respect to the even spins and edges which do not intersect
BallR (x).
    The same bounds hold true if µZ2 is replaced by µCylL , provided that L > 2R.




Figure 19: Each arm of the annulus Annulus3r/2,r (x) must touch a large number of small
boxes, creating arm events around those smaller boxes.


Proof. Just like in the proof of Lemma 19.5, it suffices to consider the case that R = 2r.
We shall also suppose that x = (0, 0); this makes no difference to the proof.
    Recall the constant of c′arm from Lemma 19.5 on the linear bound on arm exponents.
Since Lemma 19.5 already handles Equation (342) for small values of n, it suffices to restrict
ourselves to the case that n = 100 · K · 2k for integers k ≥ 1, where K is a constant to be
fixed later.

                                                     79
     Let r̄ := 2−k−2 · r. The annulus Annulus3r/2,r (x) can be tiled by exactly 5 · 22k+2
squares of side length 2r̄. Write S for the set of centres of these squares. Now for any
percolation ω ⊂ R2 which belongs to Arm(Annulus3r/2,r ), we may find at least 2k elements
u1 , . . . , u2k in S such that ω ∈ Arm(Annulus2r̄,r̄ (ui )) for each i = 1, . . . , 2k ; see Figure 19.
By a pigeonhole argument, we get
                                            X
                             K2r,r,x ≥ n =⇒    K2r̄,r̄,u ≥ 25 · K · 22k .                         (343)
                                               u∈S
                                                                                                     2
We must prove that the event on the right has a µZ2 [ · |E]-probability of at most 2−carm n .
    We call a set S ′ ⊂ S separating if the boxes (Ball2r̄ (u))u∈S ′ are disjoint. We shall use
the following input from Lemma 19.5: there exists some fixed constant p > 0 such that,
for any separating S ′ ⊂ S, the random variables (K2r̄,r̄,u )u∈S ′ in µZ2 [ · |E] are stochastically
dominated by an i.i.d. family of random variables having a geometric random variable of
parameter p.
    Write S for some partition of S into 25 separating subsets. The pigeonhole principle
implies that
       hn X                           o i           hn X                             o i
      µ       K2r̄,r̄,u ≥ 25 · K · 22k E ≤ 25 max
                                               ′
                                                   µ          K  2r̄,r̄,u ≥ K  · 22k
                                                                                      E .     (344)
                                                     S ∈S
           u∈S                                               u∈S ′

     The probability on the right may be bounded by the probability that the sum of 5 · 22k+2
i.i.d. geometric random variables of parameter p > 0 is at least K · 22k . By standard large
                                                      2k
deviation estimates, this probability decays like e−c2 for some constant c > 0, provided
that K is some sufficiently large fixed constant (depending only on p). Since n is of order
2k , this gives the desired quadratic bound.


20     Level line tree and branching function
20.1     Heuristic of the level line tree
Before formally describing the level line tree, we first give an analogy with the Gaussian
free field, and then proceed with some preliminary remarks on the combinatorial structure
important for the definition.

Discussion of the coupling of the GFF with CLE(4). The Gaussian free field in a
disk with zero boundary conditions has a natural coupling with CLE(4) [BP25]. Conditional
on the CLE(4) loops, we orient them counterclockwise or clockwise (independently and
with equal probability). The GFF is then morally equal to some constant λ times the net
winding of the loops around each point. In this picture, the conditional variance between
two points equals λ2 times the number of loops surrounding both points.
    We can also think of the CLE(4) loops as a rooted tree: the root is the whole disk, the
other tree vertices are simply connected subsets of the disk whose boundary is a CLE(4)
loop, and each tree vertex points to its parent, the smallest tree vertex strictly containing
it. Each point in the disk may be associated with the set of tree vertices containing it,
which may be interpreted as a tree path starting at the root and going downwards (it may
be finite or infinite, typically it is infinite). In this formalism, the number of loops (and
therefore the conditional covariance) may be expressed in terms of the depth of the lowest
common ancestor of the tree paths of the two points.
    In practice, we will be interested in the expectation of products of height differences.
The height difference between two points of the disk is naturally expressed in terms of a

                                                  80
tree path between them. This tree path may be finite or infinite on both ends (for typical
points, it is a bi-infinite paths). The natural path x → y is the concatenation of the tree
path from x to the lowest common ancestor of x and y, and the tree path from that ancestor
to y. The conditional expectation of the product of k height differences is then equal to
some function of the way that the k tree paths intersect each other.


Notes on the combinatorial structure of the level line tree. We now put ourselves
in the context of the measure µ+   D , which means that the boundary height is equal to 0.
Suppose for a second that we explore the outermost ω◦− -circuits. Then all of the following
hold true:
    • On each ω◦− -circuit, the height is equal to +2 or −2, depending on the value of the
      odd spins outside the circuit,
    • The odd spins on each connected component of R2 \ ω are fair coin flips (Lemma 14.7),
    • The Markov property (Lemma 14.12) implies a renewal property: within each circuit
      ∂B, the conditional law of the spins and edges within B is given by µ−       B (which is
      nothing more than µ+  B  with  all even spins flipped).
This enables the definition of a tree structure bearing some resemblance to the tree defined
above for the GFF. At the same time, there are some differences.
    • In the discrete the tree is finite, which makes things easier.
    • The ±2-labels of the outermost ω◦− -circuits are not independent, because it may
      happen that two such circuits are surrounded by the same connected component of
      odd spins in Lemma 14.7, in which case they have the same label.
    • There is a notion of odd and even circuits: starting from µ+      D , one explores the
      outermost ω◦− -circuits, then, within each circuit, the outermost ω◦+ -circuits, et cetera.
      This parity issue is unrelated to the ±2-labels (more precisely, the parity issue is
      related to the parity of the even spins, while the ±2-labels relate to odd spins).
    • The precise height at a face is not determined by the tree structure alone; sometimes
      we require small corrections, for example when the face itself is odd (and we need a
      correction of the form ±1).
These issues slightly complicate the definition of the tree structure (see the comments
following the definition). Nevertheless, we can still apply the same logic as for the tree in
the GFF case to bound correlations, as we will see for instance in the next section.


20.2    Formal definition of the level line tree
Definition 20.1 (Level line tree). Consider a sample (σ◦ , ω̄, σ• ) from the measure µ+D for
some even domain D. The associated level line tree X = (V◦ (X ), V• (X ), E(X )) is a rooted
directed tree, defined as follows.
    • The even vertices V◦ (X ) are defined as follows.
         – First, it has a bipartition V◦ (X ) = V◦+ (X ) ∪ V◦− (X ).
         – V◦+ (X ) is the partition of {σ◦ = +} such that two faces are in the same member
           of the partition if and only if they belong to the same connected component of
           R2 \ ω◦− .
         – V◦− (X ) is the partition of {σ◦ = −} such that two faces are in the same member
           if and only if they belong to the same connected component of R2 \ ω◦+ .
         – The root of the tree is the member of V◦+ (X ) containing ∂D.
    • The odd vertices V• (X ) of the tree are formed by the bounded connected components
      of R2 \ ω.
    • Each vertex (other than the root) has exactly one outgoing edge:

                                               81
    Figure 20: The directed level line tree X associated with a configuration (σ◦ , ω̄).


         – Each odd vertex v• points towards the even vertex v◦ containing the outer
            boundary of the connected component v• ⊂ R2 \ ω,
         – Each even vertex v◦ labelled ± points toward the odd vertex v• such that:
              ∗ v◦ and v• lie in the same connected component C of R2 \ ω ∓ ,
              ∗ v• is the unique such odd vertex pointing towards V◦∓ (X ) (in fact, the other
                odd vertices in the same connected component C point back to v◦ ).
For each vertex v other than the root, we let p(v) denote the parent vertex. The depth of a
vertex is defined as its distance to the root. Notice that vertices in V◦+ (X ), V◦− (X ), and
V• (X ) are at depth 4Z, 4Z + 2, and 2Z + 1 respectively. Notice also that each odd vertex
has at most one child pointing towards it.
Remark 20.2. The odd spins are also integrated into the tree as odd vertices. This
facilitates the definition of the height function at every face of the graph.
Remark 20.3. The definition of the even vertices is different from the above informal
sketch. One surprising aspects lies in the fact that two ω + -circuits can surround each other,
and still belong to the same even vertex of the tree. This is natural because no height
difference is realised when no ω − -circuits separates the two.
    Ultimately, the definition is set up in such a way that the following lemma works.

                                              82
   The lemma below says that conditionally on X , the law of h(v) is given by the sum of k
independent ±2-valued coin flips if the depth of v is 2k, and by the sum of k independent
±2-valued coins and one ±1-valued coin if the depth of v is 2k + 1.

Lemma 20.4 (Basic properties of the level line tree). Let D denote an even domain, and
consider µ+ D . Then, all of the following hold true.
   (i) X is measurable in terms of (σ◦ , ω̄),
  (ii) Conditional on X , an independent fair coin flip σ• (X) is attached to each element
       X ∈ V• (X ), so that σ• (x) = σ• (X) for every x ∈ X,
 (iii) h is almost surely constant on each vertex of X ,
 (iv) Conditional on X , the height function h has the following law:
          • h(r) = 0 on the root vertex r,
          • (h(v• ) − h(p(v• )))v• ∈V• (X ) has the law of independent fair ±1-valued coin flips,
          • h(v◦ ) − h(p(v◦ )) = h(p(v◦ )) − h(p(p(v◦ ))) for any even non-root vertex v◦ .
Here, we recall that p(v) denotes the parent vertex, as introduced in Definition 20.1.

Proof. While this lemma is important, its proof follows straightforwardly from the definitions.
Property (i) is immediate as the definition only involves (σ◦ , ω̄). For Property (ii), observe
that the odd vertices are precisely the connected components of R2 \ ω, so that Lemma 14.7
applies. Properties (iii) and (iv) follow from the relation between spins and the height
function, detailed in Equation (247).

Definition 20.5 (Tree path). Let D denote an even domain, and consider the level line
tree X in µ+ D . For any u, v ∈ F (D), we define the tree path p
                                                                uv as the unique path in X

starting at the vertex containing u and ending at the vertex containing v. It is viewed as a
set of vertices of X .


20.3     Branching function
We now introduce a convenient tool to analyse the covariance structure of the height
function.

Definition 20.6 (Branching function). Let D denote an even domain. Consider the level
line tree X in µ+
                D . Let p
                         u∂D be the unique X -path from u to ∂D. The branching function

is the random X -measurable function
                                               (
                                                |pu∂D ∩ pv∂D | − 1 if u, v ∈ F (D),
     ψ = ψD : F (Z2 ) × F (Z2 ) → Z, (u, v) 7→                                      (345)
                                                0                  otherwise.

Its diagonal is denoted
                                                (
                                                 the X -depth of u if u ∈ F (D),
       ψ ∗ = ψD
              ∗
                : F (Z2 ) → Z, u 7→ ψD (u, u) =                                            (346)
                                                 0                 otherwise.

Lemma 20.7 (Basic properties of the branching function). The branching function ψ and
its diagonal ψ ∗ satisfy the following properties.
   (i) ψ ∗ is a graph homomorphism from F (D) to Z that equals 0 on ∂D.
  (ii) ψ ∗ preserves the parity of the faces.
 (iii) ψ ∗ is equal to the maximum of h over all possible realisations of h given X .

                                               83
 (iv) ψ encodes the conditional covariance of each pair of faces as follows:
                           
                           4k
                                     if ψ(u, v) = 2k,
          +
         µD [h(u)h(v)|X ] = 4k + 1 if ψ(u, v) = 2k + 1 and ψ ∗ (u) = ψ ∗ (v) = 2k + 1,
                           
                             4k + 2 if ψ(u, v) = 2k + 1 and ψ ∗ (u) ∨ ψ ∗ (v) > 2k + 1.
                           
                                                                                      (347)
Proof. The first two follow from the definition. Conditionally on X , the height function is
obtained by sampling the labels σ• (X) for every X ∈ V• (X ) and attributing the spin to
each odd faces (see the comment following the proof of Lemma 20.4). It is easy to see that
if the labels σ• (X) are chosen so that they maximise the height function, then we obtain
h = ψ∗.
    For the fourth property, we make the link with the GFF picture sketched in the beginning
of this section. Each odd vertex is labelled ± by flipping independent fair coins. Each
ω + /ω − -circuit is associated with a height gain of ±2, and so the conditional covariance of
h(u) and h(v) is (roughly speaking) equal to 4 times the number of alternating ω + /ω − -
circuits surrounding both u and v. We must be a bit more careful at odd heights, because
the total height contains an additional ±1-contribution. To make the distinction between
the second and third case in Equation (347), observe that since no odd X -vertex has more
than one child, ψ(u, v) = 2k + 1 implies that either u or v is at depth 2k + 1 in the tree.

Definition 20.8 (Maximal domains). Let D ⊂ R2 denote any simply connected set, and
consider an even spin configuration (σ◦ , ω̄). Let M+ (D) denote the set of maximal even
domains D subject to the following two conditions:

                              ∂D ⊂ D        and      ∂D ⊂ ω + .                         (348)

The set M− (D) is defined similarly by replacing ω + with ω − .
   We also let ∂M± (D) ⊂ R2 denote the union of ∂D ⊂ R2 over all D ∈ M± (D).
Lemma 20.9 (Recursion relation for the branching function). Consider the independent
                measures (µ+
coupling of all Q          B )B over all even domains. More precisely, define the probability
                    +
measure P := B µB , where the product is over all even domains. Let     P D denote a fixed
even domain. Then, in the probability measure P, ψD and (ψD ∧ 2) + B∈M− (D) ψB have
the same distribution.
Proof. Suppose that we simply explore the domains M− (D) and everything that happens
outside the union ∪M− (D) of those domains. Conditionally on M− (D), the configuration
inside ∪M− (D) is given by the independent product
                                        Y
                                              µ−
                                               B                                 (349)
                                        B∈M− (D)

(this follows from the spatial Markov property). Notice that by definition of M− (D) and
by the independent flip symmetry in each smaller domain, we get

                                        ψD (u, v) ≤ 2                                   (350)

for any u, v unless u and v belong to the same domain B ∈ M− (D). Moreover, if u and v
belong to the same domain B ∈ M− (D), then

                                  ψD (u, v) = 2 + ψB (u, v).                            (351)

This yields the lemma via Equation (349).

                                             84
     We conclude by gathering two useful properties related to the branching function.

Lemma 20.10 (Monotonicity for the branching function). The following holds true.
  (i) FKG inequality. The law of ψ satisfies the FKG inequality in any measure µ+  D,
 (ii) Monotonicity in domains. The law of ψ in µ+  D is stochastically increasing in the
      domain D.

Proof. We prove that ψ ∧ 2k satisfies both properties for all k ≥ 1 by inducting on k. The
base case k = 1 is easy since ψ ∧ 2 is a decreasing function of the triple (σ◦ , ω + , −ω − ), for
which both properties are known by ◦-FKG (see Lemmas 15.2 and 15.6).
    By similar reasoning, the law of ∪M− (D) in µ+  D is also stochastically increasing in D.
   We nowPstart the induction step: suppose that ψ ∧ 2k satisfies both properties. Then
the law of B∈M− (D) (ψB ∧ 2k) is increasing in ∪M− (D), and satisfies the FKG inequality.
By the tower property (see for instance in the proof of Proposition 15.4) for the FKG
inequality with respect to conditioning on ∪M− (D), this implies that
                                    X
                      (ψD ∧ 2) +           (ψB ∧ 2k) = ψD ∧ (2k + 2).                       (352)
                                     B∈M− (D)

satisfies both properties as well. This concludes the induction step and the proof.


21      Regularity estimate in full plane (Theorem 4.5)
We are now in a position to establish the regularity estimates stated in Theorem 4.5. It is
proved in three steps: first, we express the correlation function Φk in terms of the level line
tree (Subsection 21.1), second we introduce a way to relate the geometry of the level line
tree to arm events (Subsections 21.2 and 21.3), and third we use this relation to bound the
correlation function (Subsection 21.4).

21.1     Bounding the k-point correlations in terms of the level line tree
Recall Definition 20.5. We first prove the following lemma.

Lemma 21.1. Fix k ∈ 2Z≥1 and u ∈ (F (Z2 ))2k , and let D denote an even domain
containing all faces in u. Then
                         k
                        hY                      i     X hY                 i
                   µ+
                    D         (h(u′i ) − h(ui )) ≤ 2k  µ+
                                                        D  I(u   ′
                                                               i i j j ,
                                                                u  , u u′
                                                                          )                     (353)
                        i=1                                   π          ij∈π

                                                                                       ′   ′
where the sum runs over pairings of {1, . . . , k}, and where I(vv ′ , zz ′ ) := |pvv ∩ pzz ∩ V• (X )|.
         ′
Here, pzz refers to the unique X -path from z to z ′ .

Proof. The idea is to bound the conditional expectation of the product of the height
differences, given X . This conditional expectation may be bounded as follows. The height
difference h(u′i ) − h(ui ) may be written
                                                     ′
                                                |pui ui |−1
                                                                  u u′          u u′
                                                   X
                           h(u′i ) − h(ui ) =                     i i
                                                              h(pn+1  ) − h(pni i )             (354)
                                                   n=0

where | · | denotes the length of the path.

                                                     85
    We decompose the left-hand side of (353) by conditioning on X and writing each height
difference as in the previous displayed equation. We then expand the sum with respect to
the product. At the end, we obtain a sum of products of (integer) powers of terms of the
         ui u′i        u u′
form h(pn+1     ) − h(pni i ). Each term in the sum contributes −1, 0, or 1, so that it suffices
to upper bound the number of terms with a nonzero contribution.
    Since increments of h on edges of X only interact on edges incident to the same odd
                                           ′      ′
vertex, we get, if I(vv ′ , zz ′ ) := |pvv ∩ pzz ∩ V• (X )|,
                        hQ                           i
                            k
                     µ+               ′ ) − h(u )) X   ≤ π ij∈π 4I(ui u′i , uj u′j ),     (355)
                                                        P Q
                      D     i=1 (h(u  i        i


where π runs over pairings of {1, . . . , k} and paths are viewed as subsets of V (X ).
   Clearly |π| = k/2. The tower property yields
                  hQ                       i       P + hQ                          i
                     k
               µ+
                D
                             ′
                     i=1 (h(ui ) − h(ui )) ≤ 2
                                                 k
                                                     π µD
                                                                        ′       ′
                                                             ij∈π I(ui ui , uj uj ) ,                 (356)

where the I(ui u′i , uj u′j ) are viewed as random variables.

21.2     Key input for the regularity estimate
We now want to bound the right hand side of Equation (353). While the appropriate bound
requires a bit of geometrical analysis, the kea idea is fairly simple and explained in the
following lemma.

Lemma 21.2. Let u, u′ , v, v ′ ∈ Z2 denote four points contained in some finite domain D.
Then all of the following hold true.
  (i) Suppose that {u, u′ } is contained in one connected component of R2 \ AnnulusR,r (x)
      and {v, v ′ } in the other connected component, where r ≥ 4, R ≥ 2r, and x ∈ R2 .
      Then
                                       I(uu′ , vv ′ ) ≤ 4KR,r,x ,                   (357)
      where KR,r,x counts alternating arms in the annulus as defined in Equation (334).
 (ii) If u and u′ are neighbours (or v and v ′ ), then

                                                I(uu′ , vv ′ ) ≤ 4.                                   (358)
                                                                         ′
Proof. The second part is easy: if u ∼ u′ , then I( · ) ≤ |puu ∩ V• (X )| ≤ 4. For the first
                                                ′      ′
part, notice that as we walk along the path puu ∩ pvv , we discover alternating ω-circuits,
which each have the property that they separate u from u′ and v from v ′ . In particular,
each such circuit creates an arm in the annulus. The factor 4 royally suffices. This implies
the desired result.

    To bound the right-hand side of Equation (353), we would like to proceed as follows:
if we can find an annulus for each pair ij ∈ π such that the |π| = k/2 annuli are disjoint,
then we can simply apply the previous lemma and Remark 19.6 to bound the expectation
of the product of the arm counts.
    For the general case (when the scale separation between some of the pairs is small), we
must do more work. To reduce to the case with good scale separation, we shall further
decompose each variable I( · ). This random variable clearly satisfies the triangular inequality
I(vv ′′ , zz ′ ) ≤ I(vv ′ , zz ′ ) + I(v ′ v ′′ , zz ′ ). In the next subsection, we decompose the right hand
side of Equation (353), to the point that we can use Lemma 21.2 in combination with
Lemma 19.5.

                                                    86
21.3      Organizing the points in a suitable fashion
The purpose of the following lemma is roughly as follows: if the points a, a′ , b, b′ do not
have good scale separation, then we may find a path from a to a′ such that we can apply
one of the two scenarios of Lemma 21.2 to each step of the path (against {b, b′ }). The
shortest appropriate path is called an optimal path.

Lemma 21.3. Recall the discrete scale separation function SR′ 2 in Equation (29). Then
for each k ∈ 2Z≥1 , there exists a constant Nk ∈ R>0 with the following properties. For
any two pairs of points {a, a′ } and {b, b′ } in Z2 with |a′ − a| ≤ |b′ − b|, there exists a path
p = (p(n))0≤n≤ℓ ⊂ Z2 of length at most Nk · SR′ 2 ({a, a′ }, {b, b′ }) from a to a′ such that for
each 0 ≤ n ≤ ℓ − 1, one of the following two holds true:
    • γ(n) and γ(n + 1) are neighbours,
    • SR2 ({γ(n), γ(n + 1)}, {b, b′ }) ≥ 20k 2 .
    The shortest such path is called optimal.

   The lower bound 20k 2 on the scale separation may appear arbitrary at this point. Its
choice is motivated by the following problem. Broadly speaking, we want that the annuli do
not overlap in order to apply Lemma 19.5. If the scale separation is large enough, then we
may extract appropriate disjoint annuli. This is proved in the following “shrinking annuli”
lemma which one can skip in a first reading.

Lemma 21.4 (Shrinking annuli lemma). Fix N ∈ Z≥2 and a family (Ri , ri , xi )i=1,...,N ⊂
                                                     2
(0, ∞) × (0, ∞) × R2 satisfying Ri /ri ≥ e40N . Then, we may find some (Ri′ , ri′ )i=1,...,N ⊂
(0, ∞) × (0, ∞) such that:
   (i) The radii satisfy ri ≤ ri′ ≤ Ri  ′ ≤R ,
                                               i
                                       2
  (ii) The radii satisfy Ri′ /ri′ =
                                       p
                                    4N
                                          Ri /ri ≥ e10 for each i,
 (iii) The annuli (AnnulusRi′ ,ri′ (xi ))i=1,...,N are pairwise disjoint.
                                              2
Proof. Set Q = 2N 2 and ρi := 2Q Ri /ri = 4N Ri /ri ≥ e10 . Let P denote the uniform
                                 p            p

probability measure on the random element s ∈ {0, . . . , Q − 1}N . Define the random annuli

 Ai := AnnulusRi′ ,ri′ (xi );       Ri′ := Ri′ (si ) := ri · ρ2s
                                                              i
                                                                i +2
                                                                     ;     ri′ := ri′ (si ) := ri · ρi2si +1 (359)

in this probability space. These radii clearly satisfy the first two properties; it suffices to
prove that the annuli are disjoint with positive P-probability, a fact which would follow
from P[{Ai ∩ Aj ̸= ∅}] ≤ 2/N 2 for any distinct i and j.
    Let us turn to the proof of this fact. Fix i ̸= j and let O ⊂ {0, . . . , Q − 1}2 denote the
set of pairs (si , sj ) which lead to overlapping annuli. Fix (a, b) ∈ O; we then claim that

     O ∩ {(a′ , b′ ) : a′ > a, b′ ≤ b} = ∅         or        O ∩ {(a′ , b′ ) : a′ ≤ a, b′ > b} = ∅.        (360)

Indeed, without loss of generality (by swapping i and j if necessary), we may assume
that Ri′ (a) ≥ Rj′ (b). One can then see that for any a′ > a and b′ ≤ b, the annulus
AnnulusRi′ (a′ ),ri′ (a′ ) (xi ) is disjoint from BallRj′ (b) (xj ), hence from AnnulusRj′ (b′ ),rj′ (b′ ) (xj ).
    With (360) in hand, we get that |O| ≤ 4Q. This implies the desired bound P[{Ai ∩ Aj ̸=
∅}] ≤ 4Q/Q2 = 2/N 2 , and concludes the proof of the lemma.

21.4      Proof of the regularity estimate
We are now ready to dive into the proof of Theorem 4.5.

                                                        87
Figure 21: Left: An optimal path qij from ui to u′i for a pair ij ∈ πb . Right: If ij ∈ πg ,
then no optimal path is needed.


Proof of Theorem 4.5. Recall that the law of h is the same in µZ2 and EZ2 (Lemma 18.7).
We therefore only need to bound the correlations in an even domain with + boundary
conditions, and then to let the domain go to Z2 to obtain our result. From now on, we fix
a large enough even domain D containing all the points of u.
    By Lemma 21.1, it suffices to bound for every π,
                                     hY                   i
                                                ′      ′
                                  µ+
                                   D      I(u i i j j .
                                               u  , u u  )                          (361)
                                           ij∈π

Below, we shall view π in (353) as a set of ordered pairs ij = (i, j), where we order each
pair such that |u′i − ui | ≤ |u′j − uj |. For each ij ∈ π, let qij denote the optimal path from
ui to u′i (relative to the pair {uj , u′j }). Write |qij | for the length of this path (this quantity
is bounded via Lemma 21.3). Partition the pairs in π into two sets, as follows.
    • The set πg is defined as the set “good” pairs, that is, the pairs ij which satisfy
      SR2 ({ui , u′i }, {uj , u′j }) ≥ 20k 2 . This means that automatically, |qij | = 1 for any
      ij ∈ πg .
    • The remaining pairs are “bad”; the set of bad pairs is denoted πb . For ij ∈ πb , it is
      still possible that
                        Q |qij | = 1 for ij ∈ πb , namely when ui and ui are neighbours.
                                                                                 ′

    Define I(π) := ij∈π {0, . . . , |qij | − 1}; the path decomposition leads to
                                                                                              
               hY                         i  X        Y
           µ+D         I(ui u′i , uj u′j ) ≤     µ+
                                                  D
                                                           I(qij (nij )qij (nij + 1), uj u′j ) . (362)
                ij∈π                    n∈I(π)         ij∈π

    Next, we are going to bound the random variables I( · ) using Lemma 21.2. We
distinguish three cases (see Figure 21).
  (i) If ij ∈ πb and qij (nij ) and qij (nij + 1) are neighbours, then I( · ) ≤ 4 deterministically.
 (ii) If ij ∈ πb and the two faces are not neighbours, then there exists an annulus
      Aijn := AnnulusRijn ,rijn (xijn ) such that {qij (nij ), qij (nij + 1)} is contained in one
      connected component of R2 \ Aijn , and {uj , u′j } in the other connected component,
                                          2
      and such that Rijn /rijn ≥ e10k . In that case, Lemma 21.2 gives

                                         I( · ) ≤ 4KRijn ,rijn ,xijn .                           (363)

(iii) If ij ∈ πg , then we may argue as for the previous case, except that we may choose
                                                     ′         ′             2
      the annulus such that Rijn /rijn ≥ eSR2 ({ui ,ui },{uj ,uj })/2 ≥ e10k .
Writing πb,n ⊂ πb for the pairs in Case (ii), we get
                                                                                       
                 hY                       i     X            Y
             µ+D       I(ui u′i , uj u′j ) ≤ 4k   µ+
                                                   D
                                                                     KRijn ,rijn ,xijn  . (364)
                   ij∈π                       n∈I(π)          ij∈πg ∪πb,n


                                                  88
The right-hand side is easy to upper bound if the annuli do not overlap (using Remark 19.6),
but the disjointness is not guaranteed by our construction. We therefore apply the shrinking
annuli lemma (Lemma 21.4) with N = k/2 to find a family of non-overlapping annuli
A′ijn := AnnulusRijn′     ′
                        ,rijn (xijn ) ⊂ Aijn (with ij ∈ πg ∪ πb,n ) with radii rij ≥ 4 and
              k2
  ′    ′         Rijn /rijn ≥ e10 .
               p
Rijn /rijn =
    Thanks to the inclusion of the annuli, the previous estimate turns into
                                                                               
                 hY                       i     X        Y
             µ+D       I(ui u′i , uj u′j ) ≤ 4k   µ+
                                                   D
                                                              KRijn
                                                                   ′   ′
                                                                     ,rijn ,xijn .
                                                                                      (365)
                   ij∈π                       n∈I(π)        ij∈πg ∪πb,n

The expectation on the right may now be bounded as follows: first we bound the expectation
of K( · ) for the annulus with the largest outer radius, then the conditional expectation
of the K( · ) with the next-largest outer radius, et cetera. Lemma 19.5 (more precisely
Remark 19.6) asserts that the conditional expectation of each KRijn        ′   ′
                                                                             ,rijn ,xijn is bounded by
   ′     ′
(Rijn /rijn )−c arm /(1 − 2   −c arm  ) in this procedure. We therefore get
           hY                       i            4k         X     Y
                                                                           ′     ′
      µ+ D       I(u i u′
                        i , uj u′
                                j )   ≤          −carm )k/2
                                                                        (Rijn /rijn  )−carm .    (366)
            ij∈π
                                         (1 −  2               ij∈π ∪π
                                                        n∈I(π)    g   b,n

Using the lower bounds on Rijn        ijn provided by Lemma 21.4 and Lemma 21.3 (which
                                  ′ /r ′

bounds |qij | and therefore |I(π)|), we get the bound
                                      Y e−(carm /2k2 )SR2 ({ui ,u′i },{uj ,u′j }) if ij ∈ πg ,
                                         (
         hY                     i
                     ′       ′
     µD+
               I(ui ui , uj uj ) ≤ Ck                                                          (367)
          ij∈π                        ij
                                          1 ∨ −SR′ 2 ({ui , u′i }, {uj , u′j }) if ij ∈ πb .

As mentioned in the preamble of the proof, this implies the claim, as one can let D to Z2
and sum over every π to get a bound on |Φk (u)|.


22     Regularity estimate (cylinder, Corollary 4.7)
The proof is quite straightforward relative to the proof of Theorem 4.5. We can essentially
work as for the full-plane case, except when the cylinder is very thin relative to the distance
between the points (see the picture on the right in Figure 22). In that case, we must slightly
modify our proof. This modification is very natural: rather than counting alternating arms
in an annulus, we count alternating arms going through a thin subcylinder. This leads to
an even better bound than the one we need.
Proof of Equation (34) in Corollary 4.7. We first prove that there is some constant C such
that
                        |ΦCylL ,2 ((0, 0), (k, 0), (2k, 0), (3k, 0))| ≤ C            (368)
for any k and L. Fix N = 109 . For simplicity we split in three cases.

Small values for k (k ≤ N ). If k ≤ N , then ΦCylL ,2 ((0, 0), (k, 0), (2k, 0), (3k, 0)) ≤ N 2 .

Values for k that are large, but smaller than the cylinder (N < k ≤ L/40). This
is the “full-plane case”. Set u := (k/2, 0), r = 5k/8, and R = 2r = 5k/4. By arguing as in
the proof of Theorem 4.5 (Section 21), we see that
                    |ΦCylL ,2 ((0, 0), (k, 0), (2k, 0), (3k, 0))| ≤ 8µCylL [KR,r,u ],           (369)
where KR,r,u is defined in (334); see Figure 22. This expectation is uniformly bounded by
Remark 19.6.

                                                   89
                     Figure 22: Regularity estimates for the cylinder


Values where k is on the scale of the cylinder (k > N ∨ (L/40)). This is the
“cylinder case”. To illustrate why this case is different, suppose for a moment that L is
in fact much smaller than k (for example, L ≈ k/100). The problem that arises is that
the annulus considered in the previous case wraps around the cylinder many times, and
therefore the estimate that we used before does not make sense. To circumvent this problem,
we are going to replace the annulus by a different shape, which leverages the topology of
the cylinder. This leads to an even better upper bound, even though a constant bound
suffices for our purposes.
    Define the subcylinder A = [ 54 k, 74 k] × (R/LZ)] ⊂ CylL , and let K denote the 2Z≥0 -
valued random variable defined to be maximal subject to A having K alternating ω̄ crossings
from left to right (see Figure 22). Notice that, just like in the definition of AltArmω̄K (A),
there is not really a highest or leftmost crossing, due to the topology of A.
    By arguing as before, we see that

                 |ΦCylL ,2 ((0, 0), (k, 0), (2k, 0), (3k, 0))| ≤ 8(1 + µCylL [K]).      (370)

Importantly, the aspect ratio L/ 21 k of A is upper bounded thanks to our assumption. We
may therefore argue as before to see that K has exponentially decaying tails, uniformly in
the choice of k and L (subject to the bound on the aspect ratio). This yields the desired
uniform bound on µCylL [K], which is also uniformly bounded by Remark 19.6.

Remark 22.1. Although not necessary, in this last case it is straightforward to see that the
upper bound on the correlation function decays exponentially fast in k/L. This is consistent
with an intuition coming from the transfer matrix perspective: the eigenvalues of T (0) are
L-th roots of unity, and therefore they cannot be too close to one (without being equal to
one). This is obvious because T (0)L is the identity operator. Such a one-line proof does
not exist for the eigenvalues of the Hermitian matrix T (π/2), but it can be proved that
there are no eigenvalues in the range (1 − ε/L, 1) by RSW-type arguments.

Proof of Equation (35) in Corollary 4.7. We aim to prove that for any L ∈ 2Z≥1 and for
any integers 0 < ℓ ≤ L/2 and k ≥ ℓ/8,

                       |ΦCylL ,2 ((0, 0), (0, ℓ), (k, 0), (k, ℓ))| ≤ C(ℓ/k)c .          (371)

Again, we divide into three cases.

                                                 90
Values of k ≤ 106 ℓ. It suffices to bound the correlation function by a uniform constant.
If ℓ ≤ 1000 then this is trivial. Suppose that ℓ > 1000. Let

                       K := #AltArmω̄ (A);                                                    (372)
                              [[ℓ/10]] × [− 3ℓ , 4ℓ           [[ℓ/20]] × [− 6ℓ , 7ℓ           (373)
                                                                                     
                       A :=                      3]       \                      6]       .

Then, the correlation function is bounded by 8(1 + µCylL [K]). It is easy to prove that
µCylL [K] is uniformly bounded, by arguing as in the proof of Lemma 19.5.
                                      √
Values of k√> 106 ℓ satisfying ℓk ≤ L. This is the “full-plane case”. Fix r := 4ℓ ≥ 4
and R := 101
               ℓk. Recall the definition of Kr,R,(0,ℓ/2) from the statement of Lemma 19.5
(roughly speaking, it counts the number of alternating crossings from inside to outside in
the annulus). The level line tree picture can be developed for the cylinder: without going
into the details, it is not difficult to see that the two-point correlation function is bounded
by the number of alternating circuits separating the two points in each pair (Lemma 21.2),
which in turn is bounded by (see the picture on the left in Figure 22)

                                                  (r/R)carm
                       8µCylL [Kr,R,(0,ℓ/2) ] ≤              ∝ (ℓ/k)carm /2 ,                 (374)
                                                  1 − 2−carm
which is a bound of the desired form.
                              √
Valuespof k > 106 ℓ satisfying ℓk > L. This is the “cylinder case”. First observe that
k/L ≥ k/ℓ ≥ 1000. Define the subcylinders

                                 U0 := [L, 2L] × (R/LZ);                                      (375)
                                 U1 := [3L, k − L] × (R/LZ).                                  (376)

Write K for the 2Z≥0 -valued random variable defined to be maximal subject to AltArmω̄K (U0 )
occurring. Write E := Circuitω (U1 ). Then, the correlation function is bounded by

                                      8µCylL [1E c (1 + K)].                                  (377)

Yet, the conditional expectation µCylL [K|E c ] is uniformly bounded, and the probability
µCylL [E c ] tends to zero exponentially fast in k/L. Thus, we get a bound of the form
                                                                            √
                |ΦCylL ,2 ((0, 0), (0, ℓ), (k, 0), (k, ℓ))| ≤ Ce−ck/L ≤ Ce−c k/ℓ .            (378)

The stretch-exponential decay is even stronger than the desired polynomial decay.


23     Mixing estimate (Theorem 4.8)
This section is split into two subsections. The first subsection contains the main proof
of the mixing estimate. The second subsection analyses in further detail the covariance
structure of the height function, which is used in the last step of the main proof. The ideas
on the covariance structure are also used in the last section (Section 26).

23.1    Main part of the proof
Proof of Theorem 4.8. Fix c ∈ [1, 2], k ∈ 2Z≥3 , and ε := 1/109 throughout this section.
Consider u ∈ Dk .

                                                  91
Figure 23: The points are positioned such that the pairs (ūi , ū′i ) for i ≥ 3 have a relatively
small diameter and are far from each other and from the point (0, 0). For the proof of the
mixing estimate, it is convenient to write the height difference h(ūi ) − h(ū′i ) as Hi + H̃i for
i = 1, 2, illustrated by the figure.


Step 1: Conveniently positioning the points u. We first argue that without loss of
generality, u satisfies the following conditions (cf. Figure 23):
   • u2 = (0, 0), u′2 = (−1, 0), u′1 = (1, 0),
   • |ui − uj | ≥ 1/ε2 for any distinct i, j ≥ 2,
   • |u′i − ui | ≤ ε2 for any i ≥ 3.
Indeed, by translating the system, we may assume that u2 = (0, 0). By decomposing each
pair (ui , u′i ) into paths of tiny steps (like in the proof of Proposition 7.2) and using additivity
of the correlation functions, we may assume that inf i̸=j |uj − ui |/ supi |u′i − ui | ≥ ε5 . We
may then rescale the system such that the second and third properties are satisfied. Finally,
the statement we are trying to prove does not depend on the position of u′1 and u′2 by
the additivity property and the regularity bound, and therefore we may choose them as
described in the claim.
    Recall that u1 is the variable of interest, and we would like to let u1 tend to (0, 0) = u2 .



Step 2: Splitting the height increments. Consider |u1 | < ε and δ < ε2 , and write
w := (u3 , u′3 , . . .) ∈ Dk−2 . Write ūi ∈ F (Z2 ) for the face corresponding to ui /δ, and define
ū′i , and w̄ similarly. It now suffices to find a universal constant C < ∞ (depending only on
k) such that |(⋆)| ≤ C, where


                  (⋆) := |Φk (ū1 , ū′1 , ū2 , ū′2 , w̄) − Φ2 (ū1 , ū′1 , ū2 , ū′2 )Φk−2 (w̄)|.   (379)


    We rephrase our correlation functions in terms of the spin measure µZ2 . The key step in
the proof is to consider the random domain A defined as the unique maximal even domain
such that 0 = ū2 ∈ F (A) and ∂A ⊂ ω + ∩ Ball(1/δ) . We set A = ∅ and ∂A = {ū2 } when
such an even domain does not exist. Notice that almost surely h is constant on ∂A; write
h(∂A) for this constant value. Define the following random variables (cf. Figure 23):

                                                                 (
                       Qk          ′                              h(∂A) if F (A) ∋ ū1 ,
               P :=       i=3 (h(ūi ) − h(ūi ));          a :=
                                                                  h(ū1 ) otherwise;
               H1 := a − h(ū′1 );                          H̃1 := h(ū1 ) − a;

               H2 := h(∂A) − h(ū′2 );                      H̃2 := h(ū2 ) − h(∂A).


                                                          92
 Then,

                    Φk (ū1 , ū′1 , ū2 , ū′2 , w̄) = µZ2 [P (H1 + H̃1 )(H2 + H̃2 )];            (380)
                        Φ2 (ū1 , ū′1 , ū2 , ū′2 ) = µZ2 [(H1 + H̃1 )(H2 + H̃2 )];              (381)
                                  Φk−2 (w̄) = µZ2 [P ];                                            (382)
                                          (⋆) = CovµZ2 [P, (H1 + H̃1 )(H2 + H̃2 )].                (383)

Step 3: Rewriting (⋆) as a finite sum of bounded terms. Conditionally on ∂A, the
Markov property over A applies. This means that the tuples (P, H1 , H2 ) and (H̃1 , H̃2 ) are
independent. Moreover, we know that the second tuple has zero mean due to flip symmetry
(Lemma 14.7). Thus, we get

         (⋆) = CovµZ2 [P, H1 H2 + H̃1 H̃2 ] = CovµZ2 [P, H1 H2 ] + CovµZ2 [P, H̃1 H̃2 ].           (384)

Since P and H̃1 H̃2 are independent conditionally on A, the second term on the right-hand
side is bounded by
                                           q
                                                                                          (385)
                                        
      CovµZ2 µZ2 [P |A], µZ2 [H̃1 H̃2 |A] ≤ µZ2 [µZ2 [P |A]2 ] VarµZ2 [µZ2 [H̃1 H̃2 |A]].

Combining yields
                                                  q
             |(⋆)| ≤ | CovµZ2 [P, H1 H2 ]| +       µZ2 [µZ2 [P |A]2 ] VarµZ2 [µZ2 [H̃1 H̃2 |A]].   (386)

To get Equation (379), it suffices to bound each of the three probabilistic terms appearing
on the right in (386) by a universal constant (depending only on k). This is neither short
nor straightforward. So the three terms are handled in Lemmata 23.1, 23.2, and 23.4
below.

23.2      Proofs of the lemmata
Lemma 23.1. In the context of the proof of Theorem 4.8 (in particular Equation (386)),
there exists a constant C < ∞ (depending only on k) such that

                                           µZ2 [µZ2 [P |A]2 ] ≤ C.                                 (387)

Proof. Since A is ω + -measurable, we get

                                µZ2 [µZ2 [P |A]2 ] ≤ µZ2 [µZ2 [P |σ◦ , ω̄]2 ].                     (388)

Recall the definition of the level line tree from Section 20. We shall argue as in Section 21
on the regularity estimate. Let D be an extremely large domain. In Section 21, we argued
in Equation (355) that
                                            XY
                             |µ+
                               D [P |X ]| ≤        4I(ūi ū′i , ūj ū′j ),            (389)
                                                     π ij∈π

where π runs over the pairings of {3, 4, . . . , k}. In Section 21 our ultimate goal was to bound
the first moment of the right-hand side, but now we want to bound its second moment.
    This follows straightforwardly from Lemma 19.5. Indeed, later in Section 21 (Equa-
tion (363)), we bounded each intersection count by an arm count around ūi :

                                    I(ūi ū′i , ūj ū′j ) ≤ 4K(1/δ),(ε/δ),ūi .                  (390)

                                                        93
Letting D converge to Z2 yields
                                                         XY
                                  |µZ2 [P |σ◦ , ω̄]| ≤                16K(1/δ),(ε/δ),ūi .                    (391)
                                                             π ij∈π

But the annuli corresponding to the ūi do not overlap, and therefore we may use our
(exponential) bounds on the tail of K( · ) from Lemma 19.5 (which bounds the second
moment of each K(1/δ),(ε/δ),ūi ) to see that the second moment of the random variable
µZ2 [P |σ◦ , ω̄] is universally bounded (with a bound depending on k and c only).

    Let us turn to Lemma 23.2, which is slightly more involved but relies on similar ideas.
Lemma 23.2. In the same context (of Equation (386)), there exists a constant C < ∞
(depending only on k) such that

                                            | CovµZ2 [P, H1 H2 ]| ≤ C.                                        (392)

    Before diving into its proof, let us state a convenient intermediary result.
Lemma 23.3. In the same context (of Equation (386)), there exists a constant C < ∞
such that
                          µZ2 [µZ2 [H1 H2 |σ◦ , ω̄]2 ] ≤ C.                    (393)
Proof. Since ∂A ⊂ ω + , the set ∂A is contained in a single X -vertex. Identify ∂A with this
X -vertex. It therefore makes sense to consider the unique X -path from ū′2 to ∂A, which we
              ′
denote by pū2 ∂A .
    Let D denote an extremely large domain. By arguing as in Section 21 (Equation (355)),
we observe that
                                               ū′2 ∂A      ′
                         |µ+
                           D [H1 H2 |X ]| ≤ 4|p        ∩ pū1 ū1 ∩ V• (X )|.           (394)
                ′                                                              ′
Notice that pū2 ∂A is a truncated version of the X -path pū2 ū2 , which will work in our favour.
   The right-hand side of the previous display is a random variable, and our objective is to
bound its second moment with a universal constant.
   Define the following geometric objects (illustrated in Figure 24):

                S := Ball 1 ;           A := Annulus 4 1 ;                 R1 := [ 2δ
                                                                                   1 1
                                                                                      , δ ] × [− 4δ , 4δ ],   (395)
                              δ                                δ,δ

and R2 , R3 , R4 the rotations of R1 by the angles π/2, π, and 3π/2 around (0, 0).
      It can be verified (by analysing Figure 24) that any self-avoiding loop γ ⊂ R2 surrounding
exactly one point of the pair {ū1 , ū′1 } and exactly one of {ū2 , ū′2 } satisfies one of the following
three properties:
     1. γ ⊂ S,
     2. γ crosses R1 or R3 horizontally, or R2 or R4 vertically,
     3. γ realises an arm event for A.
      To upper bound Equation (394), we observe that each ω-connected component in
   ′          ′
pū2 ∂A ∩ pū1 ū1 ∩ V◦ (X ) must contribute to at least one of the three cases above. In fact, by
definition of A, at most two such components can be contained in S. Thus, we get
                                            ′            ′
                                         |pū2 ∂A ∩ pū1 ū1 ∩ V• (X )| ≤ Q,                                  (396)

where
                                                                                   
                     X                                       X
    Q := 24 +              #AltHorω̄ (Ri ) +                      #AltVerω̄ (Ri ) + #AltArmω̄ (A).        (397)
                    i=1,3                                    i=2,4


                                                              94
Figure 24: For Lemma 23.3, each loop which surrounds exactly one point of each pair, must
either be contained in the inner boundary of the annulus (the small square), or cross one
of the four rectangles in the easy direction, or realise an arm event for the annulus. The
figure contains an example for each of these three cases.


The term 24 compensates for the potential components in S (at most two), and a few
other components that we may loose because of boundary effects when counting crossings
(for example, in our definitions we always imposed that we start counting at the highest
ω + -crossing, thus missing out on a potential higher ω − -crossing).
     Putting our bounds together and letting D tend to Z2 yields

                                    |µZ2 [H1 H2 |σ◦ , ω]| ≤ 4Q.                           (398)

It suffices to prove that 4Q has a uniformly bounded second moment. This follows from
Lemma 19.1 (for the tails of the number of rectangle crossings) and Lemma 19.5 (for the
tails of the number of arms).

   We are now in a position to prove Lemma 23.2.

Proof of Lemma 23.2. Lemmata 23.1 and 23.3 imply that the expectations of the conditional
expectations P and H1 H2 are uniformly bounded (since the second moments are). The
product of the expectations is therefore bounded and it suffices to bound the expectation
of the product of the two conditional expectations.
    By arguing as before, we get
                                             XY
                         µ+
                          D [P H 1 H2 |X ] ≤        4I(ūi ū′i , ūj ū′j ),       (399)
                                                 π ij∈π

where we abusively write ū2 := ∂A. The sum runs over pairings of {1, . . . , k}. It suffices to
bound the term corresponding to each pairing π separately.
    Suppose first that {1, 2} ̸∈ π. Then, each pair may be ordered such that i ̸= 1, 2 for any
ij ∈ π. This assumption enables us to bound each factor as in Lemma 23.1, yielding
                              Y                                   Y
                                           ′         ′
                   lim µ+D  [    4I(ū i ūi , ūj ūj )] ≤ µZ2 [   16K(1/δ),(ε/δ),ūi ].  (400)
                  D↗Z2
                             ij∈π                         ij∈π

This leads to the desired uniform upper bound via Lemma 19.5.
   Suppose now that {1, 2} ∈ π. Then, by a reasoning similar to the previous proof, we get
                      Y                                       Y
             lim µ+D[     4I(ūi ū′i , ūj ū′j )] ≤ µZ2 [4Q   16K(1/δ),(ε/δ),ūi ], (401)
             D↗Z2
                      ij∈π                             ij∈π\{{1,2}}

which is uniformly bounded by applying again our bounds for arms and crossings.

                                                95
   It remains to bound the last term in Equation (386). This proof is quite different.

Lemma 23.4. In the same context (of Equation (386)), there exists some universal constant
C > 0 (depending only on c and k) such that

                                | VarµZ2 [µZ2 [H̃1 H̃2 |A]]| ≤ C.                      (402)

Proof. It follows immediately from the definitions and from the Markov property over A
that
                               µZ2 [H̃1 H̃2 |A] = Xū1 ,ū2 (A);                  (403)

where                               (
                                     µ+A [h(v1 )h(v2 )] if F (A) ∋ v1 , v2 ,
                     Xv1 ,v2 (A) :=                                                    (404)
                                     0                  otherwise.

Write X := Xv1 ,v2 . Note that X is an increasing function of the domain. Indeed, X(D)
can be expressed as the expectation of an increasing function of the branching function ψ
(see Lemma 20.7), and the branching function is stochastically increasing in the choice of
the domain (Lemma 20.10).
    To prove the lemma, we are going to prove the following stronger statement. There
exists a constant C < ∞ (depending only on c) with the following properties. Let B ⊂ R2
denote any bounded simply connected set, and fix any two faces v1 , v2 ∈ F (Z2 ) (say v2 is
the face at (0, 0) without loss of generality). Let B denote the largest even domain such
that ∂B ⊂ B and such that v2 ∈ F (B) (if v2 exists), and set B = ∅ otherwise. Then, we
claim that
                                   VarµZ2 [Xv1 ,v2 (B)] ≤ C.                         (405)

The monotonicity in the domain gives that (405) implies (402). We are now going to prove
Equation (405).
   Let Dn be the largest even domain contained in Ballen . We claim that the increasing
function
                               q : Z≥1 → R, n 7→ X(Dn )                            (406)

is Lipschitz with a uniform Lipschitz constant. Since qn ≤ 8n , it suffices to prove that the
increments qn+1 − qn are bounded (uniformly in all input data) for all n ≥ 100.
    Consider the measure µ+    Dn+1 . Let B denote the largest even domain containing v2
and such that ∂B ⊂ ω . By the circuit estimate, there exists some uniform probability
                         −

p > 0 such that, with probability at least p, the even domain Dn contains an ω + -circuit
which surrounds (0, 0) and is connected to ∂Dn+1 . By inclusion, the event {B ⊂ Dn } has
probability at least p as well. By recursion (Lemma 20.9) and monotonicity (Lemma 20.10),
we get

             Dn+1 [X(B)] ≤ 4 + pX(Dn ) + (1 − p)X(Dn+1 ) = 4 + pqn + (1 − p)qn+1 . (407)
 qn+1 ≤ 4 + µ+

This implies the desired uniform Lipschitz bound qn+1 − qn ≤ 4/p.
   Finally, define
                         Scale(B) := 0 ∨ sup{n ∈ Z≥1 : Dn ⊂ B}.                        (408)

To finish the proof, it suffices to prove that:
   • The variance of Scale(B) is uniformly bounded, and
   • |X(B) − qScale(B) | is uniformly bounded.

                                               96
    Lemma 19.5 implies that the second moment of Scale(B)−Scale(B) is uniformly bounded
(by exploring from the outside towards the inside, we find the desired ω + -circuit with a
uniformly positive probability at each scale, independently of the past). This implies that
the variance of Scale(B) is also uniformly bounded.
    It suffices to prove the second statement. Since X is an increasing function, it suffices
to uniformly upper bound X(B) − X(DScale(B) ). By arguing as for the Lipschitz property
above, we may find some uniform p′ > 0 such that
                                                                        
                  +
                 µB    there is some  ω −∩D
                                             Scale(B) -circuit around v 2    ≥ p′ .    (409)
                       that is also connected to ∂B
Analogously to what we did above, we deduce that
 X(B) ≤ 4 + p′ X(DScale(B) ) + (1 − p′ )X(B)        and   X(B) − X(DScale(B) ) ≤ 4/p′ . (410)
This concludes the proof.


Part E
Ingredient 2: Glimpse of scale invariance
Theorem 4.4 is proved in Section 24; Theorem 4.3 in Sections 25–26.


24     Free energy second derivative (Theorem 4.4)
It was proved in [Dum+22, Theorem 2] that the free energy f is twice differentiable at 0
whenever c ∈ [0, 2], with the value of the derivative depending on the parameter c. Moreover,
in that article, the second derivative f ′′ (0) is characterised, but not explicitly computed.
We give the explicit computation below. Theorem 4.4 is an immediate consequence of
Proposition 24.1 and Lemma 24.3 below.
    The statements in this section use another parametrisation of the six-vertex model,
namely the one given in Equation (20). Recall that this amounts to ∆ = − cos ζ.
    In this section, we use the convention that Rthe Fourier transform of any F ∈ L1 (R),
denoted Fb, where Fb : R → C is defined by t 7→ R e−itx F (x)dx.

24.1    Reduction to a Wiener–Hopf equation
The proposition below is essentially in [Dum+22], except that it is not written there as
such. Below, we shall describe how to derive the proposition from the (intermediate) results
stated in [Dum+22].
Proposition 24.1 ([Dum+22]). For any fixed ζ ∈ [0, 2π/3], let T : R → R be the unique
L1 (R)-solution of
                              Z ∞
                      T (x) −     R(x − y)T (y)dy = e(x),                       (411)
                                     0
where e and R are given by Table 3 (in particular, R is defined via its Fourier transform).
Then
                   Z ∞
                        e(x)
                             T (x)dx                          ( π
                                                                  − x
      ′′                e(0)                           e(x)     e ζ      if ζ > 0,
     f (0) = −2    0
                                     2     where           =                         (412)
                                                                e−πx if ζ = 0.
                        Z ∞
                    π                                  e(0)
                             T (x)dx
                  π−ζ 0

                                               97
                    ζ=0                               ζ ∈ (0, 32 π]
                           |t|                                           t
                      e− 2                                 sinh((π−2ζ) 2 )
    R(t)
    b
                    2 cosh( 2t )                                   t          t
                                                      2 sinh((π−ζ) 2 ) cosh(ζ 2 )
                         |t|                                         t
                       e2                                     sinh(π 2 )
    1− b
       R(t)         2 cosh( 2t )                                   t          t
                                                      2 sinh((π−ζ) 2 ) cosh(ζ 2 )
                                                           π
                                                      1 −ζx
    e(x)            e−πx 1R≥0 (x)                     ζe    1R≥0 (x)
                     1                                  1
   eb(t)            π+it                              π+iζt
                                −it      √                                                                  √
                                                                     ζ t              ζ t    Γ(1−i 2t )          2(π−ζ)
    α(t), t ∈ H+     1 −it       2π          2π
                                       Γ( 12 − 2π
                                               it     (1 − πζ )−i(1− π ) 2 · ( πζ )−i π 2
                     e 2π                         )                                       Γ(1−i(1− ζ ) t )
                                                                                                    π 2
                                                                                                                1 ζ t
                                                                                                             Γ( 2 −i π 2 )

    α+ (0)2         2 = 2 π−ζ
                           π                          2 π−ζ
                                                         π

Table 3: The summary of key quantities for the cases ζ = 0 and ζ > 0. The letter Γ refers
to the Euler gamma function.


Remark 24.2. Basic properties of the integral equation were discussed in [Dum+22,
Propositions 25 and 27]. Note that the integral kernel R has constant sign and integrates
to b
   R(0) ∈ [−1/2, 1/2]. By Young’s convolution inequality, the integral equation       P∞(411)k is
contractive and therefore has a unique L (R)-solution which may be written T = k=0 R (e)
                                          1

where R(a) := R ∗ (1R≥0 a).
   Moreover, if ζ > 0, then the integral kernel R has exponentially decaying tails, and so
does the solution T . The case ζ = 0 is similar; the integral kernel R and T have tails of
order O(x−2 ).
   We stress that to solveR (411), one first restricts it to R≥0 , solves it on L1 (R≥0 ) and then
                            ∞
uses the relation T (x) = 0 R(x − y)T (y)dy to extend T to R<0 .

Proof. First, [Dum+22, eqn. (60)] defines a function δf which it relates to f ′′ (0) by

                                                          2
                                       f ′′ (0) = − lim             1−α
                                                                                                                        (413)
                                                                        
                                                             · δf Q  2     .
                                                      α↘0 α2

The function Q is defined
                        in [Dum+22, eqn. (16)], but is not important to us. The
asymptotics of f Q 2
                   1−α
                         as α ↘ 0 are then computed in [Dum+22, Sec. 7.2] for 0 ≤ c < 2
and [Dum+22, Sec. 7.3] for c = 2. Combining them with (413) we obtain
                                         Z ∞
                              ′′       2      e(x)
                             f (0) = − 2           T (x)dx,                       (414)
                                      C∆ 0 e(0)

with C∆ defined at the start of [Dum+22, Sec. 7]. The value of C∆ is computed in [Dum+22,
Prop. 25] as
                                                               Z +∞
                                                 π
                                           C∆ =                       T (λ)dλ.                                          (415)
                                                π−ζ            0

Inserting this into (414), we obtain (412).

    The purpose of the next sections is to compute the ratio of the integrals in Equation (412),
or equivalently to derive the following result. Together with the previous proposition, it
implies Theorem 4.4.

                                                              98
Lemma 24.3. For any ζ ∈ [0, 2π/3] (corresponding to c ∈ [1, 2]), we have
                          Z ∞
                               e(x)
                                    T (x)dx
                               e(0)               π2
                            0
                          Z ∞           2 =           .                               (416)
                                               4(π − ζ)
                                 T (x)dx
                                   0
   We proceed in several steps. First, we rephrase the Wiener–Hopf equation in Fourier
space. Then, we express T in terms of the solutions of a well-chosen Riemann-Hilbert
problem. This new expression enables an explicit calculation of the ratio in Equation (412).

24.2    Fourier transform of the Wiener–Hopf equation
Equation (411) is an integral equation that can be solved explicitly via the Wiener–Hopf
method [WH31], see [AF03, p. 7.4.1] for a modern exposition. Let T = T↑ − T↓ where
T↑ := 1R≥0 T and T↓ := −1R<0 T . The Fourier transforms of T↑ and T↓ then extend to
holomorphic functions on the lower and upper half plane, respectively. Equation (411)
may then be written in Fourier space, leading to a Riemann–Hilbert problem for the
corresponding holomorphic extensions. This Riemann–Hilbert problem can be solved
uniquely and explicitly, and the solution for T is given by the inverse Fourier transform.
Once this is done, it is straightforward to calculate the ratio of the two integrals in (412).
    We now implement this strategy. Let H± ⊂ C denote the open upper and lower half
plane. Let O(C \ R) denote the set of holomorphic functions φ on C \ R, such that φ|H+
has a continuous extension to H̄+ , and such that φ|H− has a continuous extension to H̄− .
For any such φ ∈ O(C \ R), we define the continuous functions φ+ and φ− on R via
                                  φ± (t) := lim φ(t ± iλ).                              (417)
                                            λ→0+

In the context of our Wiener–Hopf equation, define
                                    (
                                     T̃↑ (t) := R e−itx T↑ (x)dx if t ∈ H− ,
                                               R
                   T̃ : C \ R, t 7→                                                     (418)
                                     T̃↓ (t) := R e−itx T↓ (x)dx if t ∈ H+ .
                                               R

Notice that T̃ ∈ O(C \ R) by the dominated convergence theorem, lim|t|→∞ T̃ (t) = 0 by
integration by parts, and T̃− = Tb↑ and T̃+ = Tb↓ by the definition of the Fourier transform.
    In Fourier space, Equation (411) is written as
                           (1 − b
                                R)Tb↑ − Tb↓ = (1 − b
                                                   R)T̃− − T̃+ = eb.                    (419)
We shall see below that this equation admits a unique solution T̃ ∈ O(C \ R) that tends to
0 as |t| → ∞. We explicitly solve it via two Riemann–Hilbert problems: we first solve a
variant of the equation without the driving term e, and then we use our first solution to
solve a second Riemann–Hilbert problem which incorporates the driving term.

24.3    Two Riemann–Hilbert problems
Branch cuts will start to play a role. We view the Gamma function Γ involved in the
definition of α as a holomorphic function on the right half plane {t ∈ C : Re(t) > 0}, and
we view the function t 7→ tt as a holomorphic function on the set C \ R≤0 . Recall that
t 7→ tt extends continuously to the point t = 0, where it takes the value 1.
    Define α ∈ O(C \ R) as follows:
                              (
                               the value given by Table 3 if t ∈ H+ ,
                      α(t) :=                                                        (420)
                               1/α(−t)                       if t ∈ H− .

                                              99
Lemma 24.4 (First Riemann-Hilbert problem). The function α satisfies the following
properties:
   (i) The functions α and α± do not vanish,
  (ii) The function α satisfies lim|t|→∞ α(t) = 1,
 (iii) We have α− /α+ = 1 − R. b

Proof. We view Γ as a holomorphic function that is non-vanishing on the right half plane,
and that Stirling’s approximation gives an estimate up to a factor of order 1 + o(1) as
|t| → ∞. The first two properties follow by basic manipulations.
    Finally, we must show that for any t ∈ R, we have
                            α− (t)        1
                                   =               = (1 − b
                                                          R)(t).                               (421)
                            α+ (t)   α+ (−t)α+ (t)
This is an elementary consequence of the well-known identities
                                      πλ                                              π
           Γ(1 + iλ)Γ(1 − iλ) =             ;          Γ( 12 + iλ)Γ( 21 − iλ) =            ,   (422)
                                   sinh(πλ)                                       cosh(πλ)

which are valid for any λ ∈ C \ iZ.

   Lemma 24.4 enables to rewrite (419) as

                                     α− T̃− − α+ T̃+ = α+ eb.                                  (423)

Lemma 24.5. There exists a unique solution G ∈ O(C \ R) to the equation

                                        G− − G+ = α+ eb                                        (424)

with lim|t|→∞ G(t) = 0. In particular, one has T̃ = G/α and Tb↑ (t) = α+ (−t)G− (t).

Proof. Equation (423) implies that G = αT̃ is a solution to Equation (424). This solution
also satisfies Tb↑ (t) = T̃− (t) = G− (t)/α− (t) = α+ (−t)G− (t).
    It suffices to prove uniqueness of the solution G. Let G′ ∈ O(C \ R) denote another
solution. Then D := G − G′ ∈ O(C \ R) satisfies

                         D− − D + = 0            and         lim D(t) = 0.                     (425)
                                                            |t|→∞

The first relation implies that D extends continuously to C and by Morera’s theorem this
extension is an entire function. The limit at infinity being 0, we get D = 0 and G = G′ by
the second relation.

Lemma 24.6. We have Tb↑ = T̃− . The functions Tb↑ = T̃− , and T̃ |H− take the explicit form

                 Tb↑ (t) = α+ (−t)α(tζ )be(t);         T̃↑ |H− (t) = α(−t)α(tζ )be(t).         (426)

Proof. The unique solution G ∈ O(C \ R) of Equation (424) is given by
                                                             (
                                                               iπ/ζ if ζ > 0,
                                            where                                              (427)
                                     
         G(t) := α(tζ ) − α(t)1H+ (t) eb(t)           tζ :=
                                                               iπ    if ζ = 0,

is the unique pole of eb in C. Indeed, the function G defined in (427) is clearly holomorphic
and has the desired limit at infinity. The jump condition is straightforwardly verified.
    The expressions for Tb↑ and T̃↑ |H− now follow from the previous lemma.

                                                 100
24.4     Proof of Lemma 24.3
We are now in a position to prove Lemma 24.3.


Proof of Lemma 24.3. Recall that T̃ |H− is a holomorphic function that extends continuously
to the real line, where it equals Tb↑ . As a consequence, using Lemma 24.6 in the third
equality gives
            Z ∞               Z
                  T (x)dx =           T↑ (x)dx = Tb↑ (0) = α+ (0)α(tζ )be(0) = π1 α+ (0)α(tζ ).       (428)
             0                    R


     The lemma therefore follows from the value of α+ (0) given in Table 3 and the identity
                                       Z ∞
                                                                   |tζ |
                                               e(x)T (x)dx =             α(tζ )2 .                    (429)
                                         0                         2π 2

    To prove the latter, observe first that T↑ and e belong to L1 (R) ∩ L2 (R). Indeed, we
already know that T ∈ L1 (R). Since T↑ is also bounded, we get T↑ ∈ L2 (R). For e the
claim is obvious.
    Plancherel’s theorem can therefore be used to obtain
                 Z ∞                 Z                    Z
                                                        1
                      e(x)T (x)dx =     e(x)T↑ (x)dx =       eb(−t)Tb↑ (t)dt.        (430)
                   0                  R                2π R

Now, T̃ |H− is holomorphic and extends continuously to R, where it equals Tb↑ . Cauchy’s
theorem implies that for some small ε > 0,
                             Z ∞                               Z
                                                     1
                                      e(x)T (x)dx =                    eb(−t)T̃ (t)dt.                (431)
                              0                     2π          R−εi


(We use that the integrand is O(1/t2 ) as |t| → ∞.) Cauchy’s integral formula (again using
the O(1/t2 ) decay) gives
                 Z ∞
                                             |tζ |             |tζ |                   |tζ |
                       e(x)T (x)dx =               T̃ (−tζ ) =       α(tζ )2 eb(−tζ ) = 2 α(tζ )2 .   (432)
                  0                           π                 π                      2π

This is exactly (429), so that the proof is completed.


25      Proof of Theorem 4.3
This section establishes Theorem 4.3. The proof relies on Ingredient 3 (Part D). In particular,
we use our bound on arm exponents (Theorem 4.9) and flip domination (Theorem 4.10).
Finally, Proposition 25.3 plays an important role – it is stated in the current section, but
its proof is deferred to Section 26.
    The proof is structured as follows. We first state a preparatory identity, linking the free
energy to a large deviations principle. Then, we present an intuitive version of our strategy,
which has some clear flaws. This guides our rigorous proof, which consists of three steps.
The first step entails Proposition 25.3, which is thus deferred to Section 26.

                                                         101
25.1    Preparatory identity
Let us first introduce the notion of constant even height circuit of h. It is a circuit γ of
edges in E◦ with the property that the height difference between the endpoints is equal to
zero. By definition, all faces corresponding to endpoints in γ have the same height, which
we denote by h(γ). We view each edge of the circuit as a line segment in R2 connecting the
centres of the two corresponding faces; so that the circuit itself can be seen as a random
subset of R2 in this way.
    Consider a topological annulus, that is, a subset A ⊂ R2 that is bounded and topologically
equivalent to an annulus. For any topological annulus A and any k > 0, define

                   A contains two even height circuits γ0 , γ+ of h with nontrivial
                                                                                   

  Circuit+k (A) := winding in A, such that γ0 is the outermost even height circuit . (433)
                      included in A, and such that h(γ+ ) − h(γ0 ) ≥ k
                                                                                   

Notice that this event is measurable in terms of the gradient of h, that is, it has a well-
defined PZ2 -probability. We shall start by giving an alternative way of characterising f ′′ (0),
where f is the free energy.

Proposition 25.1 (Variational principle). For any α ∈ (0, 1), we have

                              1
                  lim lim         log PZ2 [Circuit+αL (Aρ,L )] = f (α) − f (0),            (434)
                 ρ→∞ L→∞ 4ρL2


where Aρ,L := [[(ρ + 1)L × L]] \ [[ρL × 0]], while [[a × b]]is as defined in Equation (278).

    Proposition 25.1 can be understood as a variational principle. It tells us that the
likelihood of height function deviations of order L in a domain of size L can be expressed
in terms of the free energy functional (which provides the entropy of the system at different
slopes). For height functions, such a principle was first established in the work of Cohn,
Kenyon, and Propp in the context of the domino tiling model [CKP01] (the domino tiling
model is integrable, but the proof of the variational principle does not use the integrable
structure). All the essential ingredients for the proof of Proposition 25.1 are already present
in [CKP01]. The variational principle was later proved in a general finite-range setting
(including the six-vertex model) in a work of Sheffield [She05]. Finally, we mention [LT24],
which also establishes the variational principle for height functions which are potentially
infinite-range (also including the six-vertex model). A proof of Proposition 25.1 may thus
be found in any of the references [CKP01; She05; LT24]; we do not reproduce it here.

25.2    Naive strategy and its problems
To explain our strategy for establishing Theorem 4.3, we first “prove” the result by using
two assumptions that are sensible, but which are not exactly true or, at least, which we
cannot rigorously establish at this stage. Below, ≈ means that the events have the same
probability up to the relevant precision.
   Assume first that

                                 the average of h on the line segment [[ρL × 0]] minus
                                                                                     
              +k
  PZ2 [Circuit (Aρ,L )] ≈ PZ2                                                             .
                                 the average of h on ∂[[(ρ + 1)L × L]] is at least k
                                                                                        (435)
   If this assumption were true, then the GFF convergence (a hypothesis in Theorem 4.3)
and a GFF calculation that can be made precise quite easily (we shall do this later in full

                                              102
detail) would imply that for fixed k, we would have

   lim PZ2 [Circuit+k (Aρ,L )]
  L→∞
                  the average of h on the line segment [[ρL × 0]] minus        (4ρ)k2
                                                                      
    ≈ lim PZ2                                                              ≈ e− 2σ2 . (436)
      L→∞         the average of h on ∂[[(ρ + 1)L × L]] is at least k
    Let us now make a second assumption, which is even more optimistic: suppose that
the previous formula is true even when we set k = αL rather than keeping k fixed. Such
an assumption is a big stretch, since GFF convergence covers events with a probability of
order 1, while setting k = αL means passing to events in the large deviation regime.
    Such an assumption would allow us to combine Equations (434) and (436) with k = αL
to get
                                                       α2
                                    f (α) − f (0) ≈ − 2 .                                (437)
                                                       2σ
Since f is twice differentiable at α = 0, this is equivalent to Theorem 4.3.
    In the remainder of this section, we describe a rigorous proof of Theorem 4.3. It does not
really establish the previous two assumptions, but it is inspired by the same ideas. Remark
that the equality σ 2 = −1/f ′′ (0) may be viewed as the combination of two inequalities;
unfortunately, we will have to treat the two inequalities separately in each step.

25.3     Step 1. Splitting the large deviation event into “independent” events
This step circumvents the problems with the second assumption. We essentially split up
                                                               2
the large deviation event which has a probability of order e−cL into O(L2 ) “independent”
events which have a probability of order e−c .
Definition 25.2 (Straightened annulus). An η-straightened path is a path in R2 which
is a union of line segments of the square lattice graph ηZ2 . A (ρ, η)-straightened annulus
is a topological annulus A ⊂ [[ρ + 1]] × R such that its inner and outer boundaries are
η-straightened paths, and such that the inner boundary crosses the vertical strip [−ρ, ρ] × R.
Proposition 25.3 (Splitting). Fix c ∈ [1, 2].
 (i) Straight bound. For fixed ρ, k, N ∈ 1000Z≥1 with N ≥ 2k,
                                                                         
                   log PZ2 [Circuit+k (Aρ,N )] ≤ 4ρN 2 f ( k−24
                                                            N   ) − f (0)   .                (438)

       In particular,
                                                                           1
                                          1
                        lim sup lim sup 4ρk 2 log PZ2 [Circuit
                                                              +k
                                                                 (Aρ,N )] ≤ f ′′ (0).        (439)
                          k→∞    N →∞                                      2
 (ii) Curly bound. For fixed ρ ∈ 2Z≥1 and ε ∈ (0, 1/100), there exist constants η > 0 and
      C, r = r(ρ, ε) < ∞ such that, for sufficiently large k ∈ 2Z≥1 and for sufficiently large
      N ∈ 2Z≥1 (depending on k), we have

             1                         Y                                
          lim  log         max            PZ2 [Circuit+2⌈(1−ε)k⌉ (N Ai )]
         n→∞ n       (Ai )∈A(r,ρ,η,ε,n)
                                        i
                                                               
                            ≥ 4(ρ + 1)N 2 f ( 2(k+4)
                                                   N   ) − f (0)  + 200k 2 log ccircuit − C, (440)

       where A(r, ρ, η, ε, n) is the set of all families of ⌈(1 − ε)n⌉ disjoint (ρ, η)-straightened
       annuli Ai for 1 ≤ i ≤ ⌈(1 − ε)n⌉ of diameter at most 2r = 2r(ρ, ε) that are contained
       in [[(ρ + 1) × n]].

                                                 103
       In particular,

                               1                               Y
                                                                               +2⌈(1−ε)k/2⌉
                                                                                                    
         lim inf lim inf lim           log         max            PZ 2 [Circuit             (N Ai )]
          k→∞    N →∞ n→∞ 4(ρ + 1)nk 2       (Ai )∈A(r,ρ,η,ε,n)
                                                                  i
                                                             1            100
                                                            ≥ f ′′ (0) +      log ccircuit . (441)
                                                             2           ρ+1
    The proof of Proposition 25.3 is deferred to Section 26. We now turn to the second part
of the proof, that corresponds to a variation of the first assumption we made.

25.4     Step 2. GFF counterparts of circuit events
First, notice that our first assumption is not yet unambiguously defined, since the notion of
“average” requires the introduction of a probability measure, which we did not explicitly
do. It turns out that, from the perspective of the GFF, there is a unique natural choice of
probability measures. Let us describe this choice first. In this subsection, we shall work in
the generality of an arbitrary topological annulus A ⊂ R2 .
    For any topological annulus A, let ∂ext A denote its exterior boundary, and let ∂int A
denote its interior boundary. Introduce the function

  HA : R2 → [0, 1], x 7→ P[{a Brownian motion started at x hits ∂int A before ∂ext A}].
                                                                                     (442)
This is the unique bounded harmonic extension of
                                         (
                                           1 if x ∈ ∂int A,
                            ∂A → R, x 7→                                             (443)
                                           0 if x ∈ ∂ext A,

to R2 . Let νA denote the “Laplacian measure” associated to A: it is defined as νA := −∆HA ,
and may also be characterised as the unique finite signed measure supported on ∂A such
that for any smooth compactly supported function F : R2 → R, we have
                          Z                Z
                            F (x)dνA (x) = ∇F (x) · ∇HA (x)dx.                         (444)

                            −
Decompose νA := νA    +
                        − νA  where both terms on the right are (positive) finite measures. By
                                            −
definition, νA is supported on ∂int A, and νA
             +
                                              is supported on ∂ext A. Moreover, Equation (444)
with F = HA shows that
                                            Z
                                −
                  +
                 νA (∂int A) = νA (∂ext A) = |∇HA (x)|2 dx =: Dirichlet(HA ).            (445)

Define
                                                  1
                                    φA :=                  νA .                             (446)
                                            Dirichlet(HA )
                                                                                       −
This measure is normalised in the sense that it decomposes as the difference φ+  A − φA of
two probability measures with disjoint support. We are now ready to state the main result
of this subsection. Recall that a convergence sequence is a sequence (δn )n tending to zero
such that h(δn ) converges to a multiple of the GFF.
Proposition 25.4 (Formal version of the first assumption). For (δn )n a convergence
sequence and A a topological annulus,
                                 1       PZ2 [{⟨h, φA/δn ⟩ ≥ k}]
                          lim lim  2
                                     log                         = 0.                       (447)
                         k→∞ n→∞ k       PZ2 [Circuit+k (A/δn )]

                                               104
    Here and below, Γ denotes a normalised GFF on R2 (in the sense of Section 2.3). To
prove the previous proposition, we first need some very basic information on the behaviour
of the random variable ⟨Γ, φA ⟩.
Lemma 25.5 (GFF analysis of ⟨Γ, φA ⟩). For every topological annulus A,
  (i) The random variable ⟨Γ, φA ⟩ has the distribution N (0, 1/ Dirichlet(HA )),
 (ii) We have
                            1                            1
                       lim     log P[{⟨Γ, φA ⟩ ≥ k}] = − Dirichlet(HA ),                     (448)
                      k→∞ k 2                            2
(iii) The Gaussian process Γ may be decomposed as the sum
                                          Γ = ΓA + ⟨Γ, φA ⟩HA ,                              (449)
      where ΓA is a Gaussian process that is independent of ⟨Γ, φA ⟩.
Proof. Fix any finite Dirichlet energy generalised test function µ. Since the Green function
GR2 is the inverse of the negative-Laplacian, we get
            Dirichlet(HA ) Cov[⟨Γ, φA ⟩, ⟨Γ, µ⟩] = Cov[⟨Γ, νA ⟩, ⟨Γ, µ⟩]                     (450)
                                                   Z
                                                 = GR2 (x, y) dνA (x) dµ(y)                  (451)
                                                   Z
                                                 =   dµ(y)((−∆)−1 (−∆)HA )(y)                (452)
                                                   Z
                                                 = HA (y) dµ(y).                             (453)

In particular, we get
                                                              Z
                                                    1
                Cov[⟨Γ, φA ⟩, ⟨Γ, φA ⟩] =                       HA (y) dνA (y)               (454)
                                             Dirichlet(HA )2
                                                              Z
                                       (444)        1
                                        =                       |∇HA (y)|2 dy                (455)
                                             Dirichlet(HA )2
                                                   1
                                        =                   ;                                (456)
                                             Dirichlet(HA )
and similarly
                                                             Z
                                                   1
          Cov[⟨Γ, φA ⟩, ⟨Γ, δx − φ−
                                  A ⟩] =                       HA (y) d(δx − φ−
                                                                              A )(y)         (457)
                                             Dirichlet(HA )
                                                 HA (x)
                                           =                .                                (458)
                                             Dirichlet(HA )
Item (i) follows from (456). Item (ii) follows from item (i). Let us now focus on (iii).
Since Γ is a centred Gaussian process, it must clearly have a decomposition of the form
Γ = ΓA + ⟨Γ, φA ⟩F . It suffices to show that F = HA , which is done via (456) and (458).

   The next lemma is a direct corollary of the previous lemma.
Lemma 25.6. For a convergent sequence (δn )n and a topological annulus A,
                        1                                       1
           lim lim          log PZ2 [{⟨h, φA/δn ⟩ ≥ k}] = lim       log P[{⟨σΓ, φA ⟩ ≥ k}]   (459)
          k→∞ n→∞ k 2                                   k→∞ k 2
                                                             1
                                                       =−        Dirichlet(HA ),             (460)
                                                            2σ 2
where σ 2 is the variance of the limiting GFF along (δn )n .

                                                 105
Figure 25: By topological considerations, one of the following three events must occur
for the scaled height function (h′ )(δn ) /k: the event in the statement of Lemma 25.7 (left
picture), the event E− ∪ E+ in the proof (middle pictures), or the event E∗ in the proof
(right picture).



    The heavy lifting is now done in the following lemma. Below, a subset of F (Z2 ) is
seen as a subset of R2 by considering the union of the line segments joining the middles of
adjacent faces.



Lemma 25.7. Fix c ∈ [1, 2]. For any convergence sequence (δn )n , any topological annulus
A and any ε > 0, we may find some constant α > 0 such that the following holds true. Let
h′ denote the representative of h such that φ−      ′
                                             A/δn (h ) ∈ [0, 2) (this depends implicitly on n).
Suppose that x ∈ A and r > 0 are chosen such that Ballr (x) ⊂ A. Then,


                                   ′                                                 
                   {HA (x) − ε ≤ hk ≤ HA (x) + ε} contains
  lim lim PZ2                                                          {⟨h, φA/δn ⟩ ≥ k} = 1.
  k→∞ n→∞          a nontrivial circuit in Annulusr,αr (x)/δn
                                                                                           (461)



    We start with an informal explanation of the statement of this lemma. The height
function h(δn ) converges to a multiple of the GFF in the sense of finite-dimensional
distributions. In particular, the distribution of (h′ )(δn ) /k in the conditional measure
PZ2 [ · |{⟨h, φA/δn ⟩ ≥ k}] converges to HA + σΓA /k as n tends to infinity (Lemma 25.5).
This implies that in the double limit, (h′ )(δn ) /k converges to the deterministic function HA ,
but only in the sense of finite-dimensional distributions.
    The lemma provides a link between this distributional convergence, and the appearance
of circuits in the level sets of (h′ )(δn ) /k (which are defined on the microscopic level). More
precisely, it says that with high probability, we may find a microscopic circuit around any
point x ∈ A along which the height of (h′ )(δn ) /k is close to HA (x) (Figure 25).

                                              106
Proof. Define the following three events:
                    h′
                    { k ≤ HA (x) − 4ε } contains a nontrivial
                                                              
           E− : =                                               ;                         (462)
                    circuit in Annulusr,αr (x)/δn
                    h′
                    { k ≥ HA (x) + 4ε } contains a nontrivial
                                                              
           E+ : =                                               ;                         (463)
                    circuit in Annulusr,αr (x)/δn
                   we may find some a ∈ 2Z such that {h + a ≤ 0} ⊂ F (Z2 )
                                                                          

           E∗ : = and {h + a ≥ 2ε k} both contain a path connecting the .                 (464)
                     two boundary components of Annulusr,αr (x)/δn
                                                                          

We claim that if the event in the statement of the lemma does not occur, then the event
E− ∪ E+ ∪ E∗ must occur. The claim is true for topological reasons (Figure 25). Indeed, if
the event in the statement does not occur, then one of

                  {h′ /k − HA (x) ≥ 7ε/8} or {h′ /k − HA (x) ≤ −7ε/8}                     (465)

must contain an arm of the annulus. If the event E− ∪ E+ does not occur, then both

                 {h′ /k − HA (x) ≥ −3ε/8} and {h′ /k − HA (x) ≤ 3ε/8}                     (466)

must contain an arm of the annulus. But if one of (465) and both of (466) contain an arm,
then E∗ occurs. This proves the claim.
   By the claim, it suffices to prove that the events E− , E+ , and E∗ each occur with a
low conditional probability in the limit. We first handle E∗ by fixing a suitable value for α.
Note that the bound on arm exponents (Theorem 4.9) implies that
                                                        2 2
                                        PZ2 [E∗ ] ≤ αcε k /4 .                            (467)

If α is sufficiently small, then Lemma 25.6 implies that this probability is negligible compared
to the probability of the conditioning event. Fix such an α > 0 from now on.
    It suffices to prove that E− occurs with a conditional probability tending to zero (the
case of E+ is similar). Let πn denote the uniform probability measure on a circle of radius
α/δn centred at x/δn . By flip domination (Theorem 4.10), we get

                      ⟨h, πn − φ−
                  "(                                 )                        #
                                 A/δn ⟩                                             1
              PZ2                       ≤ HA (x) − 8ε E− ∩ {⟨h, φA/δn ⟩ ≥ k} ≥ .           (468)
                              k                                                     2

But without E− as conditioning event, Lemma 25.5 tells us that

                      ⟨h, πn − φ−
                   "(                               )                 #
                                A/δn ⟩
       lim lim PZ2                     ≤ HA (x) − 8ε {⟨h, φA/δn ⟩ ≥ k} = 0.               (469)
      k→∞ n→∞                k

This implies that the conditional probability of E− tends to zero.

Proof of Proposition 25.4. Consider a convergence sequence (δn ). Let σ 2 be the variance
of the limiting GFF. We view Equation (447) as the combination of two inequalities, which
are treated somewhat differently. More precisely, it suffices to prove that, for fixed ε > 0,
                                                PZ2 [{⟨h, φA/δn ⟩ ≥ k}]
                             lim inf lim inf                               ≥ 14 ;         (470)
                              k→∞       n→∞    PZ2 [Circuit+k+4 (A/δn )]
                                        PZ2 [Circuit+k (A/δn )]
                      lim inf lim inf                             ≥ 14 .                  (471)
                       k→∞     n→∞ PZ2 [{⟨h, φA/δ ⟩ ≥ (1 + 4ε)k}]
                                                  n



                                                  107
Proof of Equation (470). In fact, we shall prove this inequality for fixed k and n using
flip domination. Define γ0 to be the outermost even height circuit in A/δn , and γℓ to be
the outermost even height circuit in A/δn with h(γℓ ) − h(γ0 ) = ℓ. These circuits may or
may not be well-defined (if they are not, we set them equal to ∅). Introduce the event
Cℓ := {γℓ ̸= ∅}. For ℓ ∈ 2Z \ {0}, define the random variables
                                 X0 := h(γ0 ) − φ−
                                                 A/δn (h);                          (472)
                                 Xℓ := φ+
                                        A/δn (h) − h(γℓ ).                          (473)
On Cℓ , we have that
                                ⟨h, φA/δn ⟩ = X0 + ℓ + Xℓ .                         (474)
Flip domination (Theorem 4.10) implies that for any even ℓ ≥ 4,
             P[{X0 ≤ 0} ∩ Cℓ ] ≤ P[{X0 ≤ 0} ∩ C−ℓ+4 ] = P[{X0 ≥ 0} ∩ Cℓ−4 ],        (475)
where the equality is just total flip symmetry. Since also Cℓ−4 ⊂ Cℓ , we get
                              P[{X0 ≥ 0} ∩ Cℓ−4 ] ≥ 21 P[Cℓ ].                      (476)
Using flip domination (Theorem 4.10) again, we obtain
                           P[{Xℓ−4 ≥ 0}|{X0 ≥ 0} ∩ Cℓ−4 ] ≥ 21 .                    (477)
Putting things together, we arrive at
          P[{⟨h, φA/δn ⟩ ≥ ℓ − 4}] ≥ P[{X0 ≥ 0} ∩ Cℓ−4 ∩ {Xℓ−4 ≥ 0}] ≥ 41 P[Cℓ ].   (478)
Setting ℓ = k + 4 yields Equation (470).

Proof of Equation (471). Define h′ as in Lemma 25.7. Using Lemma 25.7 and a union
bound (see also Remark 16.2), we obtain
                 h′               ′
                   { k ≤ ε} and { hk ≥ 1 + 3ε} contain
                                                                                 
    lim lim PZ2                                          {⟨h, φA/δn ⟩ ≥ (1 + 4ε)k} = 1.
   k→∞ n→∞         a nontrivial circuit in A/δn
                                                                                     (479)
By the intermediate value theorem, we deduce from this that
                there are two even height circuits
                                                                                

  lim lim PZ2  γ0 , γ+ winding nontrivially in A/δn {⟨h, φA/δn ⟩ ≥ (1 + 4ε)k} = 1.
 k→∞ n→∞
                  with h(γ+ ) − h(γ0 ) ≥ (1 + ε)k
                                                      
                                                                                     (480)
Equation (471) follows by combining this with (470), Lemma 25.6, and the inequality
                                1
                 P[Cℓ+2ℓ′ −4 ] ≥ P[Cℓ ∩ C−ℓ′ ]    for any even ℓ ≥ ℓ′ ≥ 2,          (481)
                                2
which can be obtained in the same way as in the proof of Equation (470) above. This
concludes the proof.

25.5    Proof of Theorem 4.3
With everything in hand, the proof of the theorem will basically boil down to an analysis
of the Dirichlet energy.

Proof of Theorem 4.3. Consider a convergence sequence (δn )n and let σ 2 be the variance
of the associated limiting GFF.

                                            108
Proof of f ′′ (0) ≥ −1/σ 2 . First, the straight bound in Proposition 25.3 combined with
Proposition 25.4 and Lemma 25.6 yields
                                1 ′′        Dirichlet(HAρ,1 ) 1
                                  f (0) ≥ −                       .                     (482)
                                2                  4ρ        2σ 2
Introduce a new function
                       Hρ′ : R2 → [0, 1], x 7→ 0 ∨ (1 − dist(x, [[ρ × 0]]))             (483)
which coincides with HAρ,1 on ∂Aρ . As harmonic functions minimise the Dirichlet energy,
                        Dirichlet(HAρ,1 ) ≤ Dirichlet(Hρ′ ) = 4ρ + C,                   (484)
where C is a constant independent of ρ. Letting ρ goes to infinity yields the result.

Proof of f ′′ (0) ≤ −1/σ 2 . Consider the curly bound in Proposition 25.3(ii). Importantly,
for fixed ρ and ε, there are only finitely many shapes of (ρ, η)-straightened annuli Ai of
diameter at most 2r (where we say that two topological annuli have the same shape if
they differ by a translation). Since there are only finitely many shapes, we may apply
Proposition 25.4 and Lemma 25.6 to each of these shapes to get
                                 1     X Dirichlet(HA )  1            100
   − lim        min                              2
                                                     i
                                                        ≥ f ′′ (0) +      log ccircuit . (485)
      n→∞ (Ai )∈A(r,ρ,η,ε,n) 4(ρ + 1)n        2σ         2           ρ+1
                                        i

Recall that A(r, ρ, η, ε, n) is the set of all families of Kn := ⌈(1 − ε)n⌉ disjoint (ρ, η)-
straightened annuli Ai of diameter at most 2r that are contained in [[(ρ + 1) × n]].
    To deduce f ′′ (0) ≤ −1/σ 2 from (485), it suffices to demonstrate that
                              Kn
                              X
                                    Dirichlet(HAi ) ≥ 4ρn(1 − ε)2 ,                     (486)
                              i=1

since ρ and n can be taken large while ε can be taken small. Equation (486) follows from a
straightforward calculation which we now describe.
    Fix (Ai ) ∈ A(r, ρ, η, ε, n); we are now going to establish (486). Since the annuli are
disjoint, we get
                                                    Z
                                                                           2
       X
                                                                                      (487)
                                         P                    P       
           Dirichlet(HAi ) = Dirichlet     i HAi ≥         ∇2     i HAi (z) dz.
        i                                               [[ρ×n]]

For the avoidance of doubt: on the right, we only integrate the square of the vertical
derivative over a smaller set than R2 , hence the inequality. By writing z = (x, y), we may
write this out explicitly as
                                        Z ρZ n
                                                                   2
                  X
                                                                                       (488)
                                                    P       
                      Dirichlet(HAi ) ≥          ∂y    i HAi (a, b) db da.
                   i                        −ρ   −n

We now claim that for fixed a ∈ [−ρ, ρ], we have
                        Z n
                                               2             2
                                                                                        (489)
                                P        
                             ∂y   i HAi (a, b) db ≥ 2n(1 − ε) ,
                           −n

which clearly suffices for Equation (486). Notice that the total variation of i HAi along
                                                                                P
the vertical line {a} × [−n, n] is at least 2Kn ≥ 2(1 − ε)n, since each annulus contributes
at least 2 to the total variation along this line. Equation (489) now follows from the lemma
below.

                                                 109
Lemma 25.8. Let g : [−n, n] → R denote Rany continuous piecewise smooth function whose
total variation is at least 2(1 − ε)n. Then g ′ (x)2 dx ≥ 2n(1 − ε)2 .

Proof. We
        R x may  assume that g(−n) = 0 and that g is non-decreasing, by replacing it by
g̃(x) := −n |g (t)|dt if necessary (this function has the same total variation and Dirichlet
              ′

energy). This also implies that g(n) ≥ 2(1 − ε)n. But given the values g(−n) and
g(n), we know which function ĝ minimises the one-dimensional Dirichlet energy: it is a
one-dimensional harmonic function, that is, a linear interpolation. We therefore obtain

                                                    g(n)2
                      Z              Z
                         g (x) dx ≥ ĝ ′ (x)2 dx =
                          ′   2
                                                          ≥ 2n(1 − ε)2 .               (490)
                                                     2n
This finishes the proof.


26     Proof of the splitting (Proposition 25.3)
We conclude this article by proving the two bounds in Proposition 25.3. This final section
consists of two subsections; each one is dedicated to one of the two bounds. The first bound
is significantly easier to prove than the second.
     This section builds on the following ideas: the general spin representation in Section 14,
the level line tree and the covariance structure in Section 20, and the combinatorial argument
used in Section 19 (proof of Theorem 19.7).

26.1    Proof of the straight bound (Proposition 25.3(i))
The proof of Proposition 25.3(i) consists of four steps. First, we rewrite the quantity
χ := PZ2 [Circuit+k (Aρ,N )] in terms of the branching function of the spin representation.
Second, we use the FKG inequality to prove (roughly) that the probability of a circuit in
an extremely wide topological annulus A2nρ,N is at least χ2n . Third, we stack the annuli
vertically to show that we can get many horizontal crossings in an extremely large rectangle
with a probability lower bounded by some power of χ. Finally, we relate the final quantity
to the free energy f (α).

Proof of Proposition 25.3(i). Fix ρ, k, and N .

Step 1: Rewriting in terms of the branching function. Recall that the law of h is
the same in PZ2 and µZ2 . We shall work solely in the measure µZ2 . By inclusion of events,
we get
                χ := µZ2 [Circuit+k (Aρ,N )] ≤ µZ2 [AltCircuitω̄k/2−4 (Aρ,N )].      (491)
Recall the definition of maximal domains (Definition 20.8). Let D ∈ M+ (Aρ,N ) denote the
largest domain such that ∂D surrounds the interior boundary of Aρ,N (and set D := ∅ if
such a domain does not exist). By the tower property and the Markov property, we obtain

     χ ≤ µZ2 [AltCircuitω̄k/2−4 (Aρ,N )] = µZ2 µ+            ω̄
                                                                                       (492)
                                                                                   
                                                D [AltCircuitk/2−4 (Aρ,N )]1[D ̸= ∅] .

Now, recall the definition of the branching function and its diagonal ψ ∗ (Definition 20.6).
Roughly speaking, ψ ∗ /2 counts the number of alternating disjoint circuits around each
                                                  ∗
point. Since AltCircuitω̄k/2−4 (Aρ,N ) ⊂ Circuit{ψ ≥k−12} (Aρ,N ), we may use the previous
bound and monotonicity in domains (Lemma 20.10) to push D away and get
                                                        ∗
                                                       {ψ ≥k−12}
                           χ ≤ µ+
                                [[(ρ+1)N ×N ]] [Circuit          (Aρ,N )].               (493)

                                                110
Step 2: Estimating the probability of a circuit in an extremely wide annulus.
We claim that for any n ∈ Z≥1 ,
                                                            ∗
                                                        {ψ ≥k−12}
                        χ2n ≤ µ+
                               [[(2nρ+1)N ×N ]] [Circuit          (A2nρ,N )].                 (494)
We call 2n the horizontal multiplicity. To see that the claim is true, observe first that
monotonicity in domains and the FKG inequality (Lemma 20.10) imply
                                  h 2n
                                    \             ∗
                                                                                          i
        χ2n ≤ µ+
               [[(2nρ+1)N ×N ]]          Circuit{ψ ≥k−12} (Aρ,N + ((2i − 2n − 1)ρN, 0))       (495)
                                   i=1
                                              ∗
                                        {ψ ≥k−12}
            ≤ µ+
               [[(2nρ+1)N ×N ]] [Circuit          (A2nρ,N )].                                 (496)
The second inequality is just inclusion of events (see Remark 16.2).
    If we let A ∈ M− ([[(2nρ + 1)N × N ]]) denote the largest domain containing the hole of
the annulus, then boundary pushing yields
                                                       ∗
                             χ2n ≤ µZ2 [Circuit{ψA ≥k−14} (A2nρ,N )|E]                        (497)
for any event E measurable with respect to the even edges outside [[(2nρ + 1)N × N ]]. By
inclusion of events, we then conclude that
                             χ2n ≤ µZ2 [AltHorω̄k−20 ([[2nρN × N ]])|E].                      (498)

Step 3: Stacking extremely wide annuli vertically. Fix ρ′ , n ∈ Z≥1 . Apply the
previous step 2n times in 2n vertically stacked rectangles, which have horizontal multiplicity
2ρ′ n. This yields
                                      ′ 2
                                   χ4ρ n ≤ µZ2 [E+ ∩ E− ],                              (499)
where
                          E± := AltHorω̄n(k−22) ([[ρρ′ 2nN ]] × ±[0, 2nN ]).                  (500)

Step 4: Relating our quantity to the free energy. We first claim that
                                                                              2     2
                       µZ2 [AltCircuitω̄n(k−23) (Aρρ′ ,2nN )|E+ ∩ E− ] ≥ cn N                 (501)
for some small fixed constant c > 0. We prove the claim via a straightforward finite energy
or surgery argument. Indeed, condition on E+ ∩ E− , and reveal the necessary edges to
verify that this event occurs. Then, any unrevealed even edge still has a uniformly positive
probability of being open (unless it connects two vertices with known opposite spins). By
conditioning on the states of at most 100n2 N 2 such edges, we may wire up the horizontal
crossings in such a way that the event AltCircuitω̄n(k−23) (Aρρ′ ,2nN ) occurs. This proves the
display above.
    As a consequence, we get
                                                                  2   2       ′ 2
                        µZ2 [AltCircuitω̄n(k−23) (Aρρ′ ,2nN )] ≥ cn N · χ4ρ n .               (502)
Finally, by flipping the coins (for each element of V• (X ), see Lemma 20.4) to determine the
odd spins, we find
                                                                      2   2         ′ 2
                     µZ2 [Circuit+2n(k−24) (Aρρ′ ,2nN )] ≥ 2−nk · cn N · χ4ρ n .              (503)
By the variational principle (Proposition 25.1), sending first n and then ρ′ tend to infinity,
we get
                                                     1
                                f ( k−24
                                     N ) − f (0) ≥ 4ρN 2 log χ.                         (504)

This is the desired inequality.

                                                      111
26.2     Proof of the curly bound (Proposition 25.3(ii))
We start the proof with the key step, which is called ridge splitting (Lemma 26.4 below).
After the key step, we connect one side of the inequality in Lemma 26.4 to the variational
principle (Proposition 25.1), see Lemma 26.6 below. Finally, we perform three simplification
steps to connect the other side to the quantity in Proposition 25.3. The simplification
steps are: cutoff of the domain diameter (Lemma 26.12), decoupling (Lemma 26.13), and
straightening of the annuli (Lemma 26.14). The curly bound in Proposition 25.3 is an
immediate corollary of Lemma 26.14.
    The next lemma follows immediately from twice-differentiability of the free energy
obtained via the Bethe Ansatz (a result that requires exact integrability). We want this
section to be independent of such integrability, and therefore we provide an alternative
proof of this lemma that only relies on the circuit estimate.

Lemma 26.1 (Lower bound on the free energy via RSW theory). There exists a constant
cfe < ∞ such that f (α) − f (0) ≥ −cfe α2 for any α < 1.

Proof. Since f (α) is a convex function, it suffices to bound f (α) for α ≈ 0. Recall
Proposition 25.1. It is straightforward to see that the event AltCircuitω̄2⌈αL/4⌉ (Aρ,L ) is
contained in the intersection of O(ρL2 α2 ) circuit events, thus having a probability of at
                     2 2
least (ccircuit )O(ρL α ) . The circuits are combined in such a way that they form alternating
ω + -loops and ω − -loops in the topological annulus (cf. Remark 16.2). Conditional on this
event, the event Circuit+αL (Aρ,L ) has a probability of at least e−O(αL) since every circuit
is oriented upwards with probability 1/2. This lower bound leads to the desired bound in
the lemma.

26.2.1    Ridge splitting
In order to define more complicated events, it will be useful to introduce the following
notion.

Definition 26.2 (Local level line forest). Recall Definition 20.1 for the level line tree and
Definition 20.8 for maximal domains. Consider a fixed continuum domain D ⊂ R2 . The
local level line forest is the family of level line trees LD := (XD )D∈M+ (D) . This means that
we first find the maximal domains D in D with ∂D ⊂ ω + , and then construct the level line
tree XD for each such domain D.
    We are interested in ω-circuits at a certain forest depth, which means that they are
contained in a certain vertex of some level line tree XD at that distance from the root of
XD .

   We can use this notion to define ridge events. The ridge event basically means that
there is some outermost ω + -circuit in which we may find alternating ω + /ω − -circuits such
that the k-th circuit still surrounds some path crossing [a, b] × R.

Definition 26.3 (Ridge events). Let D ⊂ R2 denote a domain, fix k ∈ 2Z≥1 , and let a ≤ b.
Then, define
                      [                       [ some ω − ∩D-circuit at forest
         ω̄
  Ridgek (D, a, b) :=             ω̄
                        AltCircuitk (D \ p) =                                   , (505)
                      p                       p
                                                 depth 2k − 2 surrounds p

where the union runs over all paths p from the left of [a, b] × R to the right (see Figure 26).

                                             112
  Figure 26: Left: the event Ridgeω̄4 (D, a, b). Right: the event {# Ridgeω̄2 (D, a, b) = 2}.




  Figure 27: Left: the left event in Lemma 26.4. Right: the right event in Lemma 26.4.


   We also define
                                      some ω − ∩ D-circuit at depth 2k − 2 in XD
                                                                                   
# Ridgeω̄k (D, a, b) := #          +
                         D ∈ M (D) :                                                  ;
                                      surrounds some path p that crosses [a, b] × R
                                                                                   (506)
which simply counts the number of maximal domains in which the ridge event occurs.
    The key step in the proof of the curly bound is ridge splitting (Lemma 26.4 and
Figure 27). This lemma involves ridge events. On one side in the comparison, we consider
the event that the large rectangle contains many maximal domains containing several very
wide nested ω + /ω − -circuits (right side in Figure 27). On the other side, we chop the large
rectangle into smaller ones, and consider the event that the smaller rectangles contain many
maximal domains containing several nested ω + /ω − -circuits (left side in Figure 27).
    For ρ, k, N, ρ′ , n ∈ 2Z≥1 with k, N/k ≥ 100, define the following rectangles:
    • The rectangle with side lengths 4nρ′ (ρ + 1)N and 4nN given by

                                 RLarge := [[2nρ′ (ρ + 1)N × 2nN ]],                       (507)

   • This rectangle may be sliced vertically into 2nρ′ rectangles of width 2(ρ + 1)N and
     height 4nN , which we shall call Ri for i = 1, . . . , 2nρ′ (indexed from left to right),
   • Write Ri′ ⊂ Ri for the rectangle of width 2ρN and height 4nN centred within Ri ,
   • Write ai and bi for the x-coordinates of the left and right sides of Ri′ respectively.
Define the event
                                 nP ′                                         o
                                   2nρ
                 Eρ,k,N,ρ′ ,n :=   i=1 #  Ridgeω̄
                                               k−4 (R   i , ai , bi ) ≥ 4n2 ρ′ .          (508)

Lemma 26.4 (Ridge splitting, cf. Figure 27). For ρ, k, N, ρ′ , n ∈ 2Z≥1 with k, N/k ≥ 100,
                                     2 2 ′
   µZ2 Eρ,k,N,ρ′ ,n ≥ (ccircuit )100k n ρ · µZ2 [{# Ridgeω̄k (RLarge , a1 , b2nρ′ ) ≥ 2n}]. (509)
                  


                                              113
    The idea of the proof is that if the event on the right occurs, then we can somehow
locally rearrange our percolations ω̄ to create the event on the left. We do so by essentially
rewiring the configurations in the vertical slits between the slightly slimmer rectangles Ri′ .
The rewiring is done by first exploring the correct event (conditional on the event on the
right, see Figure 29), then using the circuit estimate to obtain the appropriate wiring (see
Figure 30).
    Before diving into the proof, let us first define an exploration process. This exploration
process may succeed or fail, with S denoting the event that it succeeds. This event contains
the event on the right in Equation (509). Once the exploration process is done, we will prove
                                                                                           2 2 ′
that conditional on S, the event Eρ,k,N,ρ′ ,n has a probability of at least (ccircuit )100k n ρ .
This will imply the lemma.
    To facilitate the construction, define, for any A, ω ⊂ R2 and any rectangle R ⊂ R2 , the
sets
                                          {u} and ∂A do not intersect the same
                                                                               
            B(A, ω, R) := u ∈ A ∩ R :                                             ;        (510)
                                          connected component of R \ ω
                                D is a connected component of B intersecting
                                                                               
            C(A, ω, R) := D :                                                      .       (511)
                                both the left and right of R

We think of B as the set of points blocked (or shielded away) from ∂A by ω within R, and
of C as the set of crossings of such blocked points in R. See Figure 28.
    In the construction below, Ri,j
                                 ′ ⊂ R is defined to be the rectangle of width 2(ρ + j/k)N
                                        i
and height 4nN centred within Ri .

Remark 26.5. We think of Ri,j
                          ′ as “interpolating” between R′ and R , in the sense that
                                                        i      i

                        Ri′ = Ri,0
                               ′      ′
                                   ⊂ Ri,1            ′
                                          ⊂ · · · ⊂ Ri,k−1    ′
                                                           ⊂ Ri,k = Ri .                   (512)

    In the setting of the lemma, the exploration process is represented by a tree T =
(V (T ), E(T )) with root RLarge . For each x ∈ V (T ) at distance j from the root, let N (x)
denote the neighbours of x at distance j + 1 from the root (the letter N refers to nesting for
reasons becoming clear shortly). The tree is constructed iteratively by explicitly constructing
the function N and the vertices at a distance j from the root (let Vj (T ) denote this set) as
follows:
    • N (RLarge ) := {bounded connected components of R2 \ ∂M+ (RLarge )}.
    • For any A ∈ V1 (T ), set N (A) := {bounded connected components of R2 \ ∂M− (A)}.
                                              ′
    • For any A ∈ V2 (T ), set N (A) := ∪2nρ         +    ′
                                           i=1 C(A, ω , Ri,k−2 ),
                                              ′
   • For any A ∈ V3 (T ), set N (A) := ∪2nρ       −   ′
                                        i=1 C(A, ω , Ri,k−3 ),




   Figure 28: The green set depicts B. Only the wide green component belongs to C.


                                              114
        Figure 29: The nested sets in the exploration tree T (assuming S occurs).


   • Then, repeat the last two steps, alternating + and −, until Vk (T ) has been defined.
With this definition, we are now in a position to prove the lemma.

Proof of Lemma 26.4. Let us first make some remarks. Notice that the tree is nesting in
the sense that A′ ⊂ A for any A′ ∈ N (A). Notice also that any A ∈ ∪j>2 Vj (T ) is contained
in some Ri . Let us write (Vj,i )i for the partition of Vj (T ) such that any A ∈ Vj,i is contained
in Ri .
    Let S denote the event
          there exist 2n distinct elements (Oℓ )ℓ=1,...,2n ⊂ V1 (T ) such that for every
                                                                                              
 S :=                                                                                             .
         1 ≤ ℓ ≤ 2n and 1 ≤ i ≤ 2nρ′ , the descendants of Oℓ contain an element of Vk,i
                                                                                              (513)
Figure 29 contains a detailed illustration of this event, zooming in on a small rectangle and
a single element Oℓ between two rectangles Ri and Ri+1 . It is tedious but straightforward
to check that S is included in the event on the right-hand side of Equation (509):

                           S ⊂ {# Ridgeω̄k (RLarge , a1 , b2nρ′ ) ≥ 2n}.                     (514)

To finish the proof, introduce the event

             any A ∈ ∪2<j≤k−2 Vj (T ) contains an ω + -circuit (if j is odd) or
                                                                              
      C :=                                                                       .           (515)
             an ω − -circuit (if j is even) surrounding all elements of N (A)

An impression of the event C is given in Figure 30. In that figure, we already explored the
tree T (it is the same realisation as used for Figure 29). The dotted area represents the
explored set, where we had to reveal states of the spins and edges to construct the tree.
The event C is the event that in the unexplored set, the percolations ω + and ω − link up
the already existing segments to form the desired circuits. In the figure, the circuits are
formed of already explored segments (marked with blue) and unexplored segments (marked
with red).
    It is again tedious but straightforward to check that

                            2nρ′
                             \
                   C∩S ⊂           {# Ridgeω̄k−4 (Ri , ai , bi ) ≥ 2n} ⊂ Eρ,k,N,ρ′ ,n .      (516)
                             i=1


                                                   115
                Figure 30: The explored set (dotted area) and the event C.


Thus, to finish the proof of the claim, it suffices to prove that
                                                                 2 2 ′
                                   µZ2 [C|S] ≥ (ccircuit )100k n ρ .                             (517)

    Let η denote the set of even edges which have been revealed in the exploration process.
For any i = 1, . . . , 2nρ′ and j = 0, . . . , k − 1, the set Ri,j+1
                                                               ′        ′ consists of two vertical
                                                                     \ Ri,j
                                                         −
strips of width N/k and height 4nN . Write Si,j and Si,j for the left and right strips
                                                                   +

respectively (see Figure 30). Then

                                2nρ′
                                 \ k−2
                                              (    +     #
                                     \   \     Verω ∪η (Si,k−j )         if j is odd;
                   C ⊃ C ′ :=                       ω − ∪η     #                                 (518)
                                i=1 j=3 #=±
                                                Ver          (Si,k−j )   if j is even.

In Figure 30, this means, for example, that Si,k−3
                                             +
                                                   is crossed vertically by the union of the
explored (dotted) set with ω (red segment). It boils down to proving that
                             +

                                                                 2 2 ′
                                  µZ2 [C ′ |S] ≥ (ccircuit )100k n ρ .                           (519)
                                     #
    Notice that within each strip Si,j , the boundary conditions on the top and bottom of
each unexplored domain are favourable for ω + (if j is odd) and ω − (if j is even). We may
therefore apply the partial circuit estimate (Lemma 19.4). The aspect ratio (the height
divided by the width) of each strip is equal to 4nk. The vertical crossing probability in
each strip may thus be lower bounded by (ccircuit )25nk (where the factor 25 royally suffices).
Since there are 4nρ′ (k − 4) such strips, we get the desired bound
                                                       ′                                 2 2 ′
              µZ2 [C|S] ≥ µZ2 [C ′ |S] ≥ (ccircuit )4nρ (k−4)·25nk ≥ (ccircuit )100k n ρ .       (520)

This finishes the proof.

26.2.2    Connecting to the free energy
To finish the proof of the curly bound, we must connect the quantities on either side in
Lemma 26.4 to the quantities on either side in Proposition 25.3. We start by relating the
probability of Eρ,k,N,ρ′ ,n to the free energy, by analysing the right hand side in Lemma 26.4.

                                                 116
Lemma 26.6 (Analysis of the large deviation event). For ρ, k, N ∈ 2Z≥1 with k, N/k ≥ 100,

            1                                        2
                                                       
                                                             2(k+4)
                                                                             
  lim lim       log µ  2 [E       ′
                           ρ,k,N,ρ ,n ] ≥ 16(ρ + 1)N     f (   N    ) − f (0)  + 100k 2 log ccircuit .
 ρ →∞ n→∞ ρ′ n2
  ′                  Z

                                                                                                (521)

Proof. We claim that
                                                             2    2
  µZ2 [{# Ridgeω̄k (RLarge , a1 , b2nρ′ ) ≥ 2n}] ≥ c̃n N µZ2 [AltCircuitω̄2n(k+4) (Aρ′ (ρ+1),2nN )]
                                                                                                  (522)
                                                             2    2
                                                      ≥ c̃n N PZ2 [Circuit+4n(k+4)+8 (Aρ′ (ρ+1),2nN )].
                                                                                                    (523)

The second inequality is inclusion of events. The first inequality follows by a standard
surgery argument (as in Step 4 in the proof for the straight bound). More precisely,
conditional on the alternating crossing event, we may explore the horizontal rectangle
crossings that it induces. Conditional on the exploration, we may now open O(n2 N 2 )
ω + /ω − -edges in order to realise the ridge event. Since each edge is open with a uniformly
positive probability, it is easy to find the desired universal constant c̃.
    By the variational principle (Proposition 25.1),

                1
   lim lim            log PZ2 [Circuit+4n(k+4)+8 (Aρ′ (ρ+1),2nN )]
  ρ′ →∞ n→∞   ρ′ n2
                                                                                                   
                                                                 = 16(ρ + 1)N 2 f ( 2(k+4)
                                                                                      N    ) − f (0)  . (524)

The previous lemma now yields the desired inequality.

Remark 26.7. By Lemma 26.1, we deduce that

                               1
                lim lim               log µZ2 [Eρ,k,N,ρ′ ,n ] ≥ 100k 2 (−cfe ρ + log ccircuit ).       (525)
               ρ′ →∞ n→∞     ρ ′ n2

26.2.3   Simplification steps
To close the gap between the event Eρ,k,N,ρ′ ,n and the curly bound in Proposition 25.3, we
perform three simplification steps.
    • Diameter cutoff (Lemma 26.12). First, we control the diameter of each domain:
      we impose that the outermost circuit of each ridge event has a diameter proportional
      to N .
    • Decoupling (Lemma 26.13). Next, we split up the occurrence of many ridges in a
      single probability measure, into the occurrence of a single ridge in many independent
      probability measures.
    • Straightening (Lemma 26.14). Finally, we impose that the ridge events occur in
      straightened domains (Definition 25.2).
These steps are slightly technical. Their order is not important, and we do not exclude the
possibility that some steps may be combined.
     Recall Lemma 26.4. Split RLarge into 4n2 ρ′ (ρ + 1) squares of side length 2N , and let
Q denote the set of centres of such squares. Recall the definition of the random variable
K2N,N,x from Lemma 19.5 (cf. Theorem 19.7). We first prove the following lemma; its proof
is similar to that of Theorem 19.7.

                                                       117
Lemma 26.8 (Bound on arm events). Let ρ, k, N, ρ′ , n ∈ 2Z≥1 with k, N/k ≥ 100. Then
for any ε, t > 0, we get
     1           hn X j K       k       oi
                         2N,N,x
         log µZ2                  ≥ t|Q| ≤ 4(ρ + 1)(1 + t(1 − carm ε2 k 2 /9)) log 2. (526)
   ρ′ n2                  εk
                     x∈Q
                                       √
Remark 26.9. In particular, if k ≥ 9/(ε carm ), and if
                                                 1000
                                   t := tε :=           (cfe − log ccircuit ),                              (527)
                                                ε2 carm
(recall that cfe comes from Lemma 26.1 and ccircuit from Theorem 16.4) then the event
          K
{ x∈Q ⌊ 2N,N,x   ⌋ ≥ t|Q|} has a much smaller probability than Eρ,k,N,ρ′ ,n .
  P
            εk

Proof. The union bound gives that
         hn X j K        k       oi                                        hnj K            k        oi
                  2N,N,x                                                            2N,N,x
                                                          X
     µZ2                   ≥ t|Q| ≤                                  µZ2                          ≥T        (528)
                   εk                                                                 εk      x
               x∈Q                               PT :Q→Z≥0 ,
                                                   x Tx =⌈t|Q|⌉


Using a greedy algorithm P
                         to find a subset Q′ ⊂ Q such that the corresponding annuli do
not overlap and such that x∈Q′ T (x) ≥ T /9, we obtain via Theorem 19.7 that for any T ,
                                 hnj K          k             oi              2 2
                                        2N,N,x
                           µZ2                            ≥T         ≤ 2−carm ε k t|Q|/9 .                  (529)
                                          εk          x

Bounding the number of functions T by 2(1+t)|Q| implies that
     hn X j K        k       oi                 2 2            2 ′                  2 2
              2N,N,x
 µZ2                   ≥ t|Q| ≤ 2(1+t)|Q|−carm ε k t|Q|/9 = 24n ρ (ρ+1)(1+t(1−carm ε k /9)) .
               εk
         x∈Q
                                                                                                            (530)
The result follows.

   We now use the quantitative bound in the previous lemma to analyse our event Eρ,k,N,ρ′ ,n .
We first need some more definitions. Recall the definition of the level line forest from
Definition 26.2.
Definition 26.10 (Local level lines forest with diameter cut-off). Consider a fixed contin-
uum domain D ⊂ R2 and a configuration (σ◦ , ω̄, σ• ). Recall that ω ± ∩ D denotes the set
of edges of ω ± which (as line segments embedded in R2 ) are entirely contained in D. Let
Tr (ω ± ∩ D) denote the set of edges in ω ± ∩ D which belong to a connected components
whose diameter is at most 2r. Let M+  r (D) denote the set of even domains D which satisfy
∂D ⊂ Tr (ω + ∩ D) and which are maximal subject to this condition. The local level line
forest with diameter cut-off is the family of level line trees LD,r := (XD )D∈M+
                                                                               r (D)
                                                                                     .

Definition 26.11 (Ridge events with diameter cut-off). The event Ridgeω̄k,r (D, a, b) and
the random variable # Ridgeω̄k,r (D, a, b) are defined exactly as before, except that they are
defined with respect to the forest LD,r instead of LD .
   Let ρ, k, N, ρ′ , n ∈ 2Z≥1 with N ≥ 100k. Recall the definition of tε from Remark 26.9.
For r := r(ρ, ε) := 1000ρε tε/8ρ , define the event
                              ′                                                           
                             2nρ
                               X                                                           
            ∗
          Eρ,ε,k,N,ρ ′ ,n :=        # Ridgeω̄2⌈(1−ε)k/2⌉,rN (Ri , ai , bi ) ≥ (1 − ε)4n2 ρ′ . (531)
                                                                                          
                                  i=1


                                                          118
Figure 31: Diameter cutoff. If alternating circuits cover a lot of vertical distance, then
this creates many arm events (see the squares on the left), violating the bound obtained in
Lemma 26.8.


Lemma 26.12 (Diameter cutoff). Let ρ, k, N, ρ′ , n ∈ 2Z≥1 with N ≥ 100k. Fix ε ∈
                                            √
(0, 1/100) and suppose that k ≥ 72ρ/(ε carm ). Then
             1              ∗                          2
                                                         
                                                               2(k+4)
                                                                                
  lim   lim      log µ 2 [E         ′
                           ρ,ε,k,N,ρ ,n ] ≥ 16(ρ + 1)N     f (   N    ) − f (0)   + 100k 2 log ccircuit .
 ρ′ →∞ n→∞ ρ′ n2
                      Z

                                                                                                  (532)
Proof. This proof is illustrated by Figure 31. By Lemma 26.8, it suffices to prove that
                                X                         
                                      K2N,N,x                  ∗
                 Eρ,k,N,ρ′ ,n \     ⌊         ⌋ ≥ tε/8ρ |Q| ⊂ Eρ,ε,k,N,ρ ′ ,n .      (533)
                                      (ε/8ρ)k
                                    x∈Q

Define the auxiliary event
                       the forests (LRi )i contain at most 2εn2 ρ′ trees
                                                                        

                 A := that contain a vertex of depth 2⌊εk/4⌋ that .                               (534)
                        has a diameter larger than 2rN
                                                                        

Suppose that A does not occur. Then, every “big” tree (that is, a tree that contains a vertex
of depth 2⌊εk/4⌋ that has a diameter larger than 2rN ) contributes at least r/2 to the sum
in the arm event (of Lemma 26.8), so that the arm event certainly occurs. Therefore, it
suffices to prove that
                                                   ∗
                               Eρ,k,N,ρ′ ,n ∩ A ⊂ Eρ,ε,k,N,ρ ′ ,n .                     (535)
    Yet, this is straightforward to see: if a tree in (LRi )i contributes to the trees counted in
Eρ,k,N,ρ′ ,n and does not belong to the trees counted in A, then it must necessarily contain a
tree contributing to those counted in Eρ,ε,k,N,ρ
                                           ∗
                                                   ′ ,n .


Lemma 26.13 (Decoupling step). Fix ρ, ε, k, and N as in the previous lemma. Then

       1                       Y
    lim  log       max           µZ2 [Ridgeω̄2⌈(1−2ε)k/2⌉ (Di , −ρN, ρN )]
   n→∞ n     (Di )1≤i≤⌈(1−ε)n⌉
                               i
                                                                       
                                 ≥ 4(ρ + 1)N 2 f ( 2(k+4)N    ) − f (0)   + 100k 2 log ccircuit . (536)

where the maximum runs over all families of disjoint even domains Di which have a diameter
of at most 2rρ,ε N , and which are contained in [[(ρ + 1)N × nN ]].

                                                  119
Proof. Consider the measure µZ2 . Let (Dij )j=1,...,|M+ (Ri )| denote the family of even
                                                                          rN
domains in M+  rN (Ri ) (where the index j is consistently chosen in a suitable way, for
example via a dictionary order on R2 ). Recall that (Dij )j is a family of disjoint even
domains of diameter at most 2rN contained in Ri . The idea of the proof is to show that:
   • We do not lose too much probability by further conditioning on the exact number of
     even domains Dij where a ridge occurs,
   • We do not loose too much probability by selecting on beforehand the domains Dij
     where the ridges occur.
The proof is mostly technical, but we shall provide full detail.
   For any even domain D, let ηD denote the set of even edges that are not contained in
D. For each ij, define the events

            Aij := Ridgeω̄2⌈(1−ε)k/2⌉,rN (Dij , ai , bi );                         pij := µ+
                                                                                           Dij [Aij ];   (537)
            Bij := {Ri′ is crossed vertically by ω + ∪ ηDij };                     qij := µ+
                                                                                           Dij [Bij ].   (538)

Observe that Aij and Bij are disjoint and that
                         ∗                                    2 ′                                        (539)
                                          P
                       Eρ,ε,k,N,ρ ′ ,n = { ij 1Aij ≥ (1 − ε)4n ρ }.

Set T := ⌈(1 − ε)4n2 ρ′ ⌉ and define the events

                                                                                                         (540)
                                          P
                                   A := { ij 1Aij = T };
                                                                                                         (541)
                                          P
                                    B := { ij 1Bijc = T };
                            G := {the event Aij ∪ Bij occurs for every ij}.                              (542)

Our first aim is to prove that
                                                ∗                                  2 ′
                                    µZ2 [A ∩ G|Eρ,ε,k,N,ρ ′ ,n ] ≥ (ccircuit )
                                                                               100n ρ
                                                                                      .                  (543)

We first claim that µZ2 -almost surely
                      Y             h\             i                 2 ′
                          qij = µZ2    Bij (Dij )ij ≥ (ccircuit )100n ρ .                                (544)
                             ij                   ij

To prove the claim, we first use the tower property and the Markov property, and then the
FKG inequality to obtain
           O         h \      i
                  +
                                                                                    (545)
 Q
     q
   ij ij =       µDij      B ij
               ij                 ij
                 h\                      i
         = µZ2           Bij (Dij )ij                                                                    (546)
                    ij
              h                                       n          \           oi
         = µZ2 {each Ri is crossed vertically by ω + } 2RLarge ∩    ηDij ⊂ ω +    (547)
                                                                                          ij

         ≥ µZ2 [{each Ri is crossed vertically by ω }]             +
                                                                                                         (548)
                         100n2 ρ′
         ≥ (ccircuit )              .                                                                    (549)

This proves the claim. It is now straightforward to prove Equation (543) by running the
following exploration process. We inspect Dij one by one, counting how often the event Aij
occurs. Let Q denote this count. If Q < T , then we first ask if Aij occurs. If it does not
occur, then we condition on the event that Bij occurs (which happens with a probability of

                                                           120
at least qij since Aij and Bij are disjoint, and we know that Aij does not occur). If Q = T ,
then we simply condition on the event that Bij occurs. The product of the probabilities    Q of
the additional conditioning events in this algorithm, is clearly lower bounded by ij qij .
The desired lower bound then follows by Equation (544). Combining with the previous
lemma, this yields the asymptotic bound
                     h                                                                     i
  µZ2 [A ∩ G] ≥ exp (n2 ρ′ ) 16(ρ + 1)N 2 f ( 2(k+4)
                                                 N   ) − f (0)  + 400k 2
                                                                         log c circuit + o(1)   .
                                                                                             (550)
    Now, notice that A ∩ G = A ∩ B. Conditional on B, let (Dℓ )ℓ=1,...,T ⊂ (Dij )ij denote
                                                                   ′

the set of even domains where Bij does not occur. By the tower property and the Markov
property, we get
                                      T
                                    Z Y                                             T
                                                                                    Y
               µZ2 [A ∩ B] =                 µ+
                                              D′
                                                 [Aℓ |Bℓc ] dµZ2 [(Dℓ′ )ℓ ] ≤ max         µ+        c
                                                                                           Dℓ [Aℓ |Bℓ ],   (551)
                                     B ℓ=1      ℓ                          (Dℓ )ℓ
                                                                                    ℓ=1

where the maximum runs over all families of T disjoint even domains Dℓ of diameter at
most 2rN such that each Dℓ is contained in some Ri .
   Set
                 BD := {[[ρN ]] × R is crossed vertically by ω + ∪ ηD }.        (552)
By stacking the rectangles (Ri )i vertically, we get the following bound:
                               Y
             max                   µ+        ω̄                              c
                                    Dℓ [Ridge2⌈(1−ε)k/2⌉,rN (Dℓ , −ρN, ρN )|BD ] ≥ µZ2 [A ∩ G],            (553)
    (Dℓ )1≤ℓ≤⌈(1−ε)4n2 ρ′ )⌉
                               ℓ

where the maximum runs over tuples of disjoint even domains Dℓ which are of diameter at
most 2rN and which are contained in RStacked := [[(ρ + 1)N × 4n2 ρ′ N ]].
    Following the same arguments as those employed to go from Equation (496) to Equa-
tion (497) in the proof of the straight bound, we obtain that for every D contained in
RStacked ,

                µ+       ω̄                    c               ω̄
                 D [Ridgek+2,rN (D, −ρN, ρN )|BD ] ≤ µZ2 [Ridgek (D, −ρN, ρN )].                           (554)

Together with Equations (550) and (553), this inequality finishes the proof.

   Recall the notions of straightened paths and straightened annuli from Definition 25.2.

Lemma 26.14 (Straightening step). Fix ρ ∈ 2Z≥1 and ε ∈ (0, 1/100). Then, we may find
constants η ∈ (0, 1/100) and r, C < ∞ such that the following holds true. Fix k, N ∈ 2Z≥1
                √
with k ≥ 72ρ/(ε carm ) and N ≥ 100k/η. Then,

      1                        Y
   lim  log        max           PZ2 [Circuit+4⌈(1−8ε)k/2⌉ (N Ai )]
  n→∞ n     (Ai )1≤i≤⌈(1−4ε)n⌉
                               i
                                                              
                             ≥ 4(ρ + 1)N 2 f ( 2(k+4)
                                                 N    ) − f (0)  + 200k 2 log ccircuit − C, (555)

where the maximum runs over all families of disjoint (ρ, η)-straightened annuli Ai of
diameter at most 2r and contained in [[(ρ + 1) × n]].

Proof. Fix ρ, ε, r = rρ,ε , and k as in the previous step. We start with a series of simple
bounds.

                                                         121
    Fix η > 0 very small, and suppose that N ∈ 2Z≥1 satisfies N > 100/η. Recall the
definition of the random variable KR,r′ ,x from Lemma 19.5 (see also Theorem 19.7). Then,
for any x ∈ R2 ,
                                                              2 2
                       µZ2 [{KN/2,2ηN,x ≥ εk/10}] ≤ (4η)carm ε k /100 .             (556)
By a union bound over the points x ∈ S := (ηN Z)2 ∩ [[2(ρ + 1)N × 4rρ,ε N ]], we deduce
                                                                           2 2
        µZ2 [{max KN/2,2ηN,x ≥ εk/10}] ≤ 1000ρrρ,ε · (4η)carm ε k /100−2 =: pρ,ε,η,k .                   (557)
              x∈S

By inclusion of events, it is then easy to deduce that
                       µZ2 [{               max       KN,ηN,x ≥ εk/10}] ≤ pρ,ε,η,k .                     (558)
                             x∈[[(ρ+1)N ×2rρ,ε N ]]

    The probability that this event occurs at least εn times in n independent samples, is
at most (2(pρ,ε,η,k )ε )n . For sufficiently small η = ηρ,ε (depending only on ρ and ε), this
probability is much smaller than the probability of the event in the previous lemma (the
decoupling step, Lemma 26.13).
    Now, consider the previous lemma. We view the product over the probabilities as a
single probability of a cylinder event R in the product measure. In this product measure,
the probability
  R ∩ {in at least (1 − 3ε)n of the domains, too many arms contribute to KN,ηN,x } (559)
has the same asymptotics as the event R itself. By choosing the domains in which the
arms occur, we get the bound
                          Y
   lim n1 log    max         µZ2 [EDi ]                                        (560)
  n→∞          (Di )1≤i≤⌈(1−3ε)n⌉
                                     i
                                                                     
                                    ≥ 4(ρ + 1)N 2 f ( 2(k+4)
                                                        N    ) − f (0)  + 100k 2 log ccircuit − log 2;
                                                                                                         (561)
where
               ED := Ridgeω̄2⌈(1−2ε)k/2⌉ (Di , −ρN, ρN ) ∩ {max KN,ηN,x ≤ εk/10}.                        (562)
                                                                    x∈Di
(the extra log 2 comes from the combinatorial choice of domains).
    Let us now study event ED . It is easy to see that
                                 [
                           ED ⊂     AltCircuitω̄2⌈(1−4ε)k/2⌉ (N A),                                      (563)
                                             A

where the union is over all (ρ, η)-straightened annuli A such that N A is completely sur-
                                                                            2
rounded by ∂D. Notice that the number of such annuli is at most 299ρrρ,ε /ηρ,ε (by simply
upper bounding the number of ηZ2 -edges that may or may not belong to the boundary of
the annulus). Thus, we get
                            Y
    lim n1 log    max           µZ2 [AltCircuitω̄2⌈(1−4ε)k/2⌉ (N Ai )]               (564)
   n→∞         (Ai )1≤i≤⌈(1−3ε)n⌉
                                        i
                                                                                     100ρrρ,ε
                ≥ 4(ρ + 1)N     2
                                        f ( 2(k+4)
                                              N ) − f (0)    + 100k 2 log ccircuit −            log 2,   (565)
                                                                                         ηρ,ε
where the maximum is over all families of disjoint (ρ, η)-straightened annuli Ai such that
each annulus has a diameter of at most 2rρ,ε and remains contained in [[(ρ + 1) × 2n]].
   To finish the proof, notice simply that
   PZ2 [Circuit+4⌈(1−8ε)k/2⌉ (N Ai )] ≥ 2−2⌈(1−4ε)k/2⌉ µZ2 [AltCircuitω̄2⌈(1−4ε)k/2⌉ (N Ai )],           (566)
by flipping the coins corresponding to each level line. This implies the desired bound.

                                                       122
Acknowledgements. This project has received funding from the Swiss National Science
Foundation and the NCCR SwissMAP. HDC acknowledges the support from the Simons
collaboration on localization of waves. The work of KKK is supported by the ERC Project
LDRAM: ERC-2019-ADG Project 884584. KKK acknowledges the support from CNRS
and from the joint AND-DFG TSF24 project ANR-24-CE92-0033. PL acknowledges the
support from the French National Research Agency (ANR), project number ANR-23-CPJ1-
0150-01.


References
[ADH]       E. Averous, H. Duminil-Copin, and T. He. “Two-arm exponent for the critical
            planar random-cluster model with cluster weight q ∈ [1, 4]”. Manuscript in
            preparation.
[AF03]     Mark J. Ablowitz and A. S. Fokas. Complex Variables: Introduction and
           Applications. Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[Aff86]     Ian Affleck. “Universal Term in the Free Energy at a Critical Point and the
            Conformal Anomaly”. In: Physical Review Letters 56.7 (1986), pp. 746–748.
[Ang+21]    Morris Ang, Gefei Cai, Xin Sun, and Baojun Wu. Integrability of Conformal
            Loop Ensemble: Imaginary DOZZ Formula and Beyond. 2021. arXiv: 2107.
            01788 [math-ph].
[Ave+a]     E. Averous, H.-B. Chen, H. Duminil-Copin, T. He, D. Krachun, I. Manolescu,
            and J. Xia. “Rotational invariance of any six-vertex model scaling limit with
            −1 ≤ ∆ ≤ − 12 ”. Manuscript in preparation.
[Ave+b]     E. Averous, H. Duminil-Copin, T. He, and D. Krachun. “Critical exponents for
            the planar random-cluster model with cluster-weight close to 4”. Manuscript
            in preparation.
[Bak61]     George A. Baker. “Application of the Padé Approximant Method to the Inves-
            tigation of Some Magnetic Properties of the Ising Model”. In: Physical Review
            124.3 (1961), pp. 768–774.
[Bax72]    Rodney J Baxter. “Partition Function of the Eight-Vertex Lattice Model”. In:
           Annals of Physics 70.1 (1972), pp. 193–228.
[Bax82]     Rodney J. Baxter. Exactly Solved Models in Statistical Mechanics. London;
            New York: Academic Press, 1982.
[BCN86]     H. W. J. Blöte, John L. Cardy, and M. P. Nightingale. “Conformal Invariance,
            the Central Charge, and Universal Finite-Size Amplitudes at Criticality”. In:
            Physical Review Letters 56.7 (1986), pp. 742–745.
[BFM14a]   G. Benfatto, P. Falco, and V. Mastropietro. “Universality of One-Dimensional
           Fermi Systems, I. Response Functions and Critical Exponents”. In: Communi-
           cations in Mathematical Physics 330.1 (2014), pp. 153–215.
[BFM14b]    G. Benfatto, P. Falco, and V. Mastropietro. “Universality of One-Dimensional
            Fermi Systems, II. The Luttinger Liquid Structure”. In: Communications in
            Mathematical Physics 330.1 (2014), pp. 217–282.
[Bil95]     Patrick Billingsley. Probability and Measure. 3rd ed. Wiley Series in Probability
            and Mathematical Statistics. New York: Wiley, 1995. 593 pp.



                                            123
[Bis09]    Marek Biskup. “Reflection Positivity and Phase Transitions in Lattice Spin
           Models”. In: Methods of Contemporary Mathematical Statistical Physics. Ed. by
           Marek Biskup, Anton Bovier, Frank den Hollander, Dima Ioffe, Fabio Mar-
           tinelli, Karel Netocný, Fabio Toninelli, and Roman Kotecký. Berlin, Heidelberg:
           Springer, 2009, pp. 1–86.
[BKW76]    R. J. Baxter, S. B. Kelland, and F. Y. Wu. “Equivalence of the Potts Model
           or Whitney Polynomial with an Ice-Type Model”. In: Journal of Physics A:
           Mathematical and General 9.3 (1976), pp. 397–406.
[BL76]     Jöran Bergh and Jörgen Löfström. Interpolation Spaces: An Introduction. Ed. by
           S. S. Chern, J. L. Doob, J. Douglas, A. Grothendieck, E. Heinz, F. Hirzebruch,
           E. Hopf, S. Mac Lane, W. Magnus, M. M. Postnikov, F. K. Schmidt, W.
           Schmidt, D. S. Scott, K. Stein, J. Tits, B. L. Van Der Waerden, B. Eckmann,
           and J. K. Moser. Vol. 223. Grundlehren Der Mathematischen Wissenschaften.
           Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 1976.
[BP25]     Nathanaël Berestycki and Ellen Powell. Gaussian Free Field and Liouville
           Quantum Gravity. Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Cambridge:
           Cambridge University Press, 2025.
[BPZ84]    A. A. Belavin, A. M. Polyakov, and A. B. Zamolodchikov. “Infinite Conformal
           Symmetry in Two-Dimensional Quantum Field Theory”. In: Nuclear Physics
           B 241.2 (1984), pp. 333–380.
[Car08]    John Cardy. “Conformal Field Theory and Statistical Mechanics”. In: Les
           Houches, Summer School on Exact methods in low-dimensional statistical
           physics and quantum computing (2008).
[Car86]    John L. Cardy. “Operator Content of Two-Dimensional Conformally Invariant
           Theories”. In: Nuclear Physics B 270 (1986), pp. 186–204.
[Car92]    J. L. Cardy. “Critical Percolation in Finite Geometries”. In: Journal of Physics
           A: Mathematical and General 25.4 (1992), pp. L201–L206.
[Ces14]    Annalisa Cesaroni. “Removable Singularities of Harmonic Functions”. 2014.
[CF24]     Federico Camia and Yu Feng. “Logarithmic Correlation Functions in 2D Critical
           Percolation”. In: Journal of High Energy Physics 2024.8 (2024), p. 103.
[Cha+21]   Nishant Chandgotia, Ron Peled, Scott Sheffield, and Martin Tassy. “Delocal-
           ization of Uniform Graph Homomorphisms from Z2 to Z”. In: Communications
           in Mathematical Physics 387.2 (2021), pp. 621–647.
[Cha98]    L. Chayes. “Discontinuity of the Spin-Wave Stiffness in the Two-Dimensional
           XY Model”. In: Communications in Mathematical Physics 197.3 (1998), pp. 623–
           640.
[Che+a]    H.-B. Chen, H. Duminil-Copin, T. He, F. Jacopin, D. Krachun, I. Manolescu,
           and J. Xia. “Critical exponents for the planar random-cluster model with
           cluster-weight q = 4”. Manuscript in preparation.
[Che+b]    H.-B. Chen, H. Duminil-Copin, T. He, D. Krachun, I. Manolescu, and J. Xia.
           “One-arm exponent for the critical planar random-cluster model with cluster
           weight q ∈ [1, 4]”. Manuscript in preparation.
[Che+14]   Dmitry Chelkak, Hugo Duminil-Copin, Clément Hongler, Antti Kemppainen,
           and Stanislav Smirnov. “Convergence of Ising Interfaces to Schramm’s SLE
           Curves”. In: Comptes Rendus Mathematique 352.2 (2014), pp. 157–161.

                                          124
[CHI15]    Dmitry Chelkak, Clément Hongler, and Konstantin Izyurov. “Conformal Invari-
           ance of Spin Correlations in the Planar Ising Model”. In: Annals of Mathematics
           181 (2015), pp. 1087–1138.
[CHI22]    Dmitry Chelkak, Clément Hongler, and Konstantin Izyurov. Correlations of
           Primary Fields in the Critical Ising Model. 2022. arXiv: 2103.10263 [math-ph].
[CKP01]    Henry Cohn, Richard Kenyon, and James Propp. “A Variational Principle
           for Domino Tilings”. In: Journal of the American Mathematical Society 14.2
           (2001), pp. 297–346.
[CN06]     Federico Camia and Charles M. Newman. “Two-Dimensional Critical Percola-
           tion: The Full Scaling Limit”. In: Communications in Mathematical Physics
           268.1 (2006), pp. 1–38.
[CN07]     Federico Camia and Charles M. Newman. “Critical Percolation Exploration
           Path and SLE6: A Proof of Convergence”. In: Probability Theory and Related
           Fields 139.3 (2007), pp. 473–519.
[CN26]     Federico Camia and Rongvoram Nivesvivat. Boundary Operators in the Brow-
           nian Loop Soup. 2026. arXiv: 2601.02755 [math-ph].
[CRV23]    Baptiste Cerclé, Rémi Rhodes, and Vincent Vargas. “Probabilistic Construction
           of Toda Conformal Field Theories”. In: Annales Henri Lebesgue 6 (2023), pp. 31–
           64.
[CS12]     Dmitry Chelkak and Stanislav Smirnov. “Universality in the 2D Ising Model and
           Conformal Invariance of Fermionic Observables”. In: Inventiones mathematicae
           189.3 (2012), pp. 515–580.
[Dav+16]   François David, Antti Kupiainen, Rémi Rhodes, and Vincent Vargas. “Li-
           ouville Quantum Gravity on the Riemann Sphere”. In: Communications in
           Mathematical Physics 342.3 (2016), pp. 869–907.
[DGT24]    Chiara Damiolini, Angela Gibney, and Nicola Tarasca. “On Factorization
           and Vector Bundles of Conformal Blocks from Vertex Algebras”. In: Annales
           Scientifiques de l’École Normale Supérieure (2024).
[DHN11]    Hugo Duminil-Copin, Clément Hongler, and Pierre Nolin. “Connection Proba-
           bilities and RSW-type Bounds for the Two-Dimensional FK Ising Model”. In:
           Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics 64.9 (2011), pp. 1165–1198.
[DLM18]    Hugo Duminil-Copin, Jhih-Huang Li, and Ioan Manolescu. “Universality for
           the Random-Cluster Model on Isoradial Graphs”. In: Electronic Journal of
           Probability 23 (2018), pp. 1–70.
[DM22]     Hugo Duminil-Copin and Ioan Manolescu. “Planar Random-Cluster Model:
           Scaling Relations”. In: Forum of Mathematics, Pi 10 (2022), e23.
[DMS97]    Philippe Di Francesco, Pierre Mathieu, and David Sénéchal. Conformal Field
           Theory. Graduate Texts in Contemporary Physics. New York, NY: Springer,
           1997.
[DMT21]    Hugo Duminil-Copin, Ioan Manolescu, and Vincent Tassion. “Planar Random-
           Cluster Model: Fractal Properties of the Critical Phase”. In: Probability Theory
           and Related Fields 181.1 (2021), pp. 401–449.
[DS09]     T. C. Dorlas and M. Samsonov. On the Thermodynamic Limit of the 6-Vertex
           Model. 2009. arXiv: 0903.2657 [cond-mat].


                                          125
[DS11]      Bertrand Duplantier and Scott Sheffield. “Liouville Quantum Gravity and
            KPZ”. In: Inventiones mathematicae 185.2 (2011), pp. 333–393.
[DS57]      Cyril Domb and M. F. Sykes. “On the Susceptibility of a Ferromagnetic
            above the Curie Point”. In: Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. A.
            Mathematical and Physical Sciences 240.1221 (1957), pp. 214–228.
[DST17]     Hugo Duminil-Copin, Vladas Sidoravicius, and Vincent Tassion. “Continuity
            of the Phase Transition for Planar Random-Cluster and Potts Models with
            1 ≤ q ≤ 4”. In: Communications in Mathematical Physics 349.1 (2017), pp. 47–
            107.
[DT15]      H. Duminil-Copin and V. Tassion. “RSW and Box-Crossing Property for Planar
            Percolation”. In: IAMP proceedings (2015).
[DT19]      Hugo Duminil-Copin and Vincent Tassion. Renormalization of Crossing Proba-
            bilities in the Planar Random-Cluster Model. 2019. arXiv: 1901.08294 [math].
[DTT18]     H. Duminil-Copin, V. Tassion, and A. Teixeira. “The Box-Crossing Property
            for Critical Two-Dimensional Oriented Percolation”. In: Probability Theory and
            Related Fields 171.3 (2018), pp. 685–708.
[Dub11]     Julien Dubédat. “Topics on Abelian Spin Models and Related Problems”. In:
            Probability Surveys 8 (2011), pp. 374–402.
[Dum+20] Hugo Duminil-Copin, Karol Kajetan Kozlowski, Dmitry Krachun, Ioan Manolescu,
         and Mendes Oulamara. Rotational Invariance in Critical Planar Lattice Models.
         2020. arXiv: 2012.11672 [math].
[Dum+21] Hugo Duminil-Copin, Maxime Gagnebin, Matan Harel, Ioan Manolescu, and
         Vincent Tassion. “Discontinuity of the Phase Transition for the Planar Random-
         Cluster and Potts Models with q > 4”. In: Annales scientifiques de l’École
         Normale Supérieure 54.6 (2021), pp. 1363–1413.
[Dum+22] Hugo Duminil-Copin, Karol Kajetan Kozlowski, Dmitry Krachun, Ioan Manolescu,
         and Tatiana Tikhonovskaia. “On the Six-Vertex Model’s Free Energy”. In: Com-
         munications in Mathematical Physics 395.3 (2022), pp. 1383–1430.
[Dum+24] Hugo Duminil-Copin, Alex M. Karrila, Ioan Manolescu, and Mendes Oulamara.
         “Delocalization of the Height Function of the Six-Vertex Model”. In: Journal of
         the European Mathematical Society 26.11 (2024), pp. 4131–4190.
[Dum23]     Hugo Duminil-Copin. “100 Years of the (Critical) Ising Model on the Hypercubic
            Lattice”. In: Proceedings of the International Congress Mathematicians 2022 1
            (2023), pp. 164–210.
[DV95]      C. Destri and H. J. de Vega. “Unified Approach to Thermodynamic Bethe
            Ansatz and Finite Size Corrections for Lattice Models and Field Theories”. In:
            Nuclear Physics B 438.3 (1995), pp. 413–454.
[DW25]      Chiara Damiolini and Lukas Woike. Modular Functors from Conformal Blocks
            of Rational Vertex Operator Algebras. 2025. arXiv: 2507.05845 [math].
[dW85]      H. J. de Vega and F. Woynarovich. “Method for Calculating Finite Size Cor-
            rections in Bethe Ansatz Systems: Heisenberg Chain and Six-Vertex Model”.
            In: Nuclear Physics B 251 (1985), pp. 439–456.
[EF63]      John W. Essam and Michael E. Fisher. “Padé Approximant Studies of the
            Lattice Gas and Ising Ferromagnet below the Critical Point”. In: The Journal
            of Chemical Physics 38.4 (1963), pp. 802–812.

                                          126
[El-+12]   Sheer El-Showk, Miguel F. Paulos, David Poland, Slava Rychkov, David
           Simmons-Duffin, and Alessandro Vichi. “Solving the 3D Ising Model with the
           Conformal Bootstrap”. In: Physical Review D 86.2 (2012), p. 025022.
[FGK25]    Saskia Faulmann, Frank Göhmann, and Karol K. Kozlowski. “Low-Temperature
           Spectrum of the Quantum Transfer Matrix of the XXZ Chain in the Massless
           Regime”. In: Probability and Mathematical Physics 6.4 (2025), pp. 1507–1658.
[Fis64]    Michael E. Fisher. “Correlation Functions and the Critical Region of Simple
           Fluids”. In: Journal of Mathematical Physics 5.7 (1964), pp. 944–962.
[Fis66]    Michael E. Fisher. “Quantum Corrections to Critical-Point Behavior”. In:
           Physical Review Letters 16.1 (1966), pp. 11–14.
[Fis67]    Michael E. Fisher. “The Theory of Condensation and the Critical Point”. In:
           Physics Physique Fizika 3.5 (1967), pp. 255–283.
[Fje+06]   Jens Fjelstad, J Urgen Fuchs, Ingo Runkel, and Christoph Schweigert. “TFT
           Construction of RCFT Correlators V: Proof of Modular Invariance and Fac-
           torisation”. In: Theory and Applications of Categories 16.16 (2006), pp. 342–
           433.
[FK72]     C. M. Fortuin and P. W. Kasteleyn. “On the Random-Cluster Model: I. In-
           troduction and Relation to Other Models”. In: Physica 57.4 (1972), pp. 536–
           564.
[FKG71]    C. M. Fortuin, P. W. Kasteleyn, and J. Ginibre. “Correlation Inequalities on
           Some Partially Ordered Sets”. In: Communications in Mathematical Physics
           22.2 (1971), pp. 89–103.
[FM17]     Marco Furlan and Jean-Christophe Mourrat. “A Tightness Criterion for Ran-
           dom Fields, with Application to the Ising Model”. In: Electronic Journal of
           Probability 22 (2017), pp. 1–29.
[Frö82]    Jürg Fröhlich. “On the Triviality of λϕ4d Theories and the Approach to the
           Critical Point in d ≥ 4 Dimensions”. In: Nuclear Physics B 200.2 (1982),
           pp. 281–296.
[FRS02]    Jürgen Fuchs, Ingo Runkel, and Christoph Schweigert. “TFT Construction of
           RCFT Correlators I: Partition Functions”. In: Nuclear Physics B 646.3 (2002),
           pp. 353–497.
[FRS04a]   Jürgen Fuchs, Ingo Runkel, and Christoph Schweigert. “TFT Construction of
           RCFT Correlators II: Unoriented World Sheets”. In: Nuclear Physics B 678.3
           (2004), pp. 511–637.
[FRS04b]   Jürgen Fuchs, Ingo Runkel, and Christoph Schweigert. “TFT Construction of
           RCFT Correlators: III: Simple Currents”. In: Nuclear Physics B 694.3 (2004),
           pp. 277–353.
[FRS05]    Jürgen Fuchs, Ingo Runkel, and Christoph Schweigert. “TFT Construction of
           RCFT Correlators IV: Structure Constants and Correlation Functions”. In:
           Nuclear Physics B 715.3 (2005), pp. 539–638.
[Gaw]      K. Gawedzki. “Conformal field theory”. To appear.
[GGM12]    Alessandro Giuliani, Rafael L. Greenblatt, and Vieri Mastropietro. “The Scaling
           Limit of the Energy Correlations in Non-Integrable Ising Models”. In: Journal
           of Mathematical Physics 53.9 (2012), p. 095214.


                                          127
[GL25]     Alexander Glazman and Piet Lammers. “Delocalisation and Continuity in 2D:
           Loop O(2), Six-Vertex, and Random-Cluster Models”. In: Communications in
           Mathematical Physics 406.5 (2025), p. 108.
[GMT17]    Alessandro Giuliani, Vieri Mastropietro, and Fabio Lucio Toninelli. “Height
           Fluctuations in Interacting Dimers”. In: Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincaré,
           Probabilités et Statistiques 53.1 (2017), pp. 98–168.
[GP23]     Alexander Glazman and Ron Peled. “On the Transition between the Disordered
           and Antiferroelectric Phases of the 6-Vertex Model”. In: Electronic Journal of
           Probability 28 (2023), pp. 1–53.
[GRV16]    Christophe Garban, Rémi Rhodes, and Vincent Vargas. “Liouville Brownian
           Motion”. In: The Annals of Probability 44.4 (2016). arXiv: 1301.2876 [math].
[GRV19]    Colin Guillarmou, Rémi Rhodes, and Vincent Vargas. “Polyakov’s Formulation
           of 2d Bosonic String Theory”. In: Publications Mathématiques de l’IHÉS 130
           (2019), pp. 111–185.
[GT19]     Alessandro Giuliani and Fabio Lucio Toninelli. “Non-Integrable Dimer Models:
           Universality and Scaling Relations”. In: Journal of Mathematical Physics 60.10
           (2019), p. 103301.
[Gui+24]   Colin Guillarmou, Antti Kupiainen, Rémi Rhodes, and Vincent Vargas. “Con-
           formal Bootstrap in Liouville Theory”. In: Acta Mathematica 233.1 (2024),
           pp. 33–194.
[Gus80]    E. Gusev. “Weak Convergence of Wave Values in Quantum Heisenberg Model”.
           In: Reports on Mathematical Physics 18.3 (1980), pp. 399–410.
[Gus85]    E. V. Gusev. “Thermodynamics and Excited States of the Heisenberg Model”.
           In: Theoretical and Mathematical Physics 63.2 (1985), pp. 527–532.
[GZ26]     Bin Gui and Hao Zhang. “Analytic Conformal Blocks of C2 -Cofinite Vertex
           Operator Algebras III: The Sewing-Factorization Theorems”. In: Proceedings
           of the London Mathematical Society 132.2 (2026).
[Hon]      Clément Hongler. “Conformal Invariance of Ising Model Correlations”. PhD
           thesis.
[HS13]     Clément Hongler and Stanislav Smirnov. “The Energy Density in the Planar
           Ising Model”. In: Acta Mathematica 211.2 (2013), pp. 191–225.
[Hul38]    Lamek Hulthén. Über das Austauschproblem eines Kristalles. 1938.
[IKR89]    A. G. Izergin, V. E. Korepin, and N. Y. Reshetikhin. “Conformal Dimensions
           in Bethe Ansatz Solvable Models”. In: Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and
           General 22.13 (1989), p. 2615.
[Kad+67]   Leo P. Kadanoff, Wolfgang Götze, David Hamblen, Robert Hecht, E. A. Lewis,
           V. V. Palciauskas, Martin Rayl, J. Swift, David Aspnes, and Joseph Kane.
           “Static Phenomena near Critical Points: Theory and Experiment”. In: Reviews
           of Modern Physics 39.2 (1967), pp. 395–431.
[Kad66]    Leo P. Kadanoff. “Scaling Laws for Ising Models near Tc ”. In: Physics Physique
           Fizika 2.6 (1966), pp. 263–272.
[Kau49]    Bruria Kaufman. “Crystal Statistics. II. Partition Function Evaluated by Spinor
           Analysis”. In: Physical Review 76.8 (1949), pp. 1232–1243.



                                          128
[KB90]    A. Klumper and M. T. Batchelor. “An Analytic Treatment of Finite-Size
          Corrections in the Spin-1 Antiferromagnetic XXZ Chain”. In: Journal of
          Physics A: Mathematical and General 23.5 (1990), p. L189.
[KBP91]   A. Klumper, M. T. Batchelor, and P. A. Pearce. “Central Charges of the 6- and
          19-Vertex Models with Twisted Boundary Conditions”. In: Journal of Physics
          A: Mathematical and General 24.13 (1991), p. 3111.
[Ken00]   Richard Kenyon. “Conformal Invariance of Domino Tiling”. In: The Annals of
          Probability 28.2 (2000), pp. 759–795.
[Ken99]   Arthur Edwin Kennelly. “The Equivalence of Triangles and Three-Pointed
          Stars in Conducting Networks”. In: Electrical world and engineer 34.12 (1899),
          pp. 413–414.
[Koz18]   Karol K. Kozlowski. “On Condensation Properties of Bethe Roots Associated
          with the XXZ Chain”. In: Communications in Mathematical Physics 357.3
          (2018), pp. 1009–1069.
[KPS14]   Filip Kos, David Poland, and David Simmons-Duffin. “Bootstrapping Mixed
          Correlators in the 3D Ising Model”. In: Journal of High Energy Physics 2014.11
          (2014), p. 109.
[KRV20]   Antti Kupiainen, Rémi Rhodes, and Vincent Vargas. “Integrability of Liouville
          Theory: Proof of the DOZZ Formula”. In: Annals of Mathematics 191.1 (2020),
          pp. 81–166.
[KT23]    Laurin Köhler-Schindler and Vincent Tassion. “Crossing Probabilities for Planar
          Percolation”. In: Duke Mathematical Journal 172.4 (2023), pp. 809–838.
[KT25]    Laurin Köhler-Schindler and Vincent Tassion. “An Introduction to Russo-
          Seymour-Welsh Theory”. In: Stochastic Geometry: Percolation, Tesselations,
          Gaussian Fields and Point Processes. Ed. by Hermine Biermé. Cham: Springer
          Nature Switzerland, 2025, pp. 1–34.
[KWZ93]   A. Klumper, T. Wehner, and J. Zittartz. “Conformal Spectrum of the Six-
          Vertex Model”. In: Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General 26.12
          (1993), pp. 2815–2827.
[Lam23]   Piet Lammers. A Dichotomy Theory for Height Functions. 2023. arXiv: 2211.
          14365 [math].
[Law14]   Gregory F. Lawler. Conformally Invariant Processes in the Plane. Providence:
          American Mathematical Society, 2014.
[Lis21]   Marcin Lis. “On Delocalization in the Six-Vertex Model”. In: Communications
          in Mathematical Physics 383.2 (2021), pp. 1181–1205.
[Lis22]   Marcin Lis. “Spins, Percolation and Height Functions”. In: Electronic Journal
          of Probability 27 (2022), pp. 1–21.
[LO24]    Piet Lammers and Sébastien Ott. “Delocalisation and Absolute-Value-FKG
          in the Solid-on-Solid Model”. In: Probability Theory and Related Fields 188.1
          (2024), pp. 63–87.
[LSM61]   Elliott Lieb, Theodore Schultz, and Daniel Mattis. “Two Soluble Models of an
          Antiferromagnetic Chain”. In: Annals of Physics 16.3 (1961), pp. 407–466.
[LSW02]   Gregory F. Lawler, Oded Schramm, and Wendelin Werner. On the Scaling
          Limit of Planar Self-Avoiding Walk. 2002. arXiv: math/0204277.


                                         129
[LSW04]    Gregory F. Lawler, Oded Schramm, and Wendelin Werner. “Conformal Invari-
           ance of Planar Loop-Erased Random Walks and Uniform Spanning Trees”. In:
           The Annals of Probability 32.1B (2004), pp. 939–995.
[LT24]     Piet Lammers and Martin Tassy. “Macroscopic Behavior of Lipschitz Random
           Surfaces”. In: Probability and Mathematical Physics 5.1 (2024), pp. 177–267.
[LW80]     Elliott H. Lieb and F. Y. Wu. “Two-Dimensional Ferroelectric Models”. In:
           12th School of Modern Physics on Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena.
           1980.
[Mas04]    Vieri Mastropietro. “Ising Models with Four Spin Interaction at Criticality”.
           In: Communications in Mathematical Physics 244.3 (2004), pp. 595–642.
[MS16]     Jason Miller and Scott Sheffield. “Imaginary Geometry I: Interacting SLEs”.
           In: Probability Theory and Related Fields 164.3 (2016), pp. 553–705.
[MS20]     Jason Miller and Scott Sheffield. “Liouville Quantum Gravity and the Brownian
           Map I: The QLE(8/3, 0) Metric”. In: Inventiones mathematicae 219.1 (2020),
           pp. 75–152.
[MW14]     Barry M. McCoy and Tai Tsun Wu. The Two-Dimensional Ising Model. second.
           Dover Publications, 2014.
[MW68]     B. M. McCoy and Tai Tsun Wu. “Hydrogen-Bonded Crystals and the Anisotropic
           Heisenberg Chain”. In: Il Nuovo Cimento B (1965-1970) 56.2 (1968), pp. 311–
           315.
[Nie82]    Bernard Nienhuis. “Exact Critical Point and Critical Exponents of O(n) Models
           in Two Dimensions”. In: Physical Review Letters 49.15 (1982), pp. 1062–1065.
[Ons44]    Lars Onsager. “Crystal Statistics. I. A Two-Dimensional Model with an Order-
           Disorder Transition”. In: Physical Review 65.3-4 (1944), pp. 117–149.
[Pol68]    A M Polyakov. “Microscopic Description of Critical Phenomena”. In: Soviet
           Physics JETP 28.3 (1968), pp. 533–539.
[Pol70a]   A M Polyakov. “Properties of Long and Short Range Correlations in the Critical
           Region”. In: Soviet Physics JETP 30.1 (1970), pp. 151–157.
[Pol70b]   Alexander M. Polyakov. “Conformal Symmetry of Critical Fluctuations”. In:
           JETP Letters 12 (1970), pp. 381–383.
[PP64]     A Z Patashinskii and V L Pokrovskii. “Second Order Phase Transitions in a
           Bose Fluid”. In: Soviet Physics JETP 19.3 (1964), pp. 677–691.
[PS]       H. Pinson and T. Spencer. “Universality in 2D Critical Ising Model.” Private
           communication.
[RS22]     Gourab Ray and Yinon Spinka. “Finitary Codings for Gradient Models and a
           New Graphical Representation for the Six-Vertex Model”. In: Random Struc-
           tures & Algorithms 61.1 (2022), pp. 193–232.
[Rus78]    Lucio Russo. “A Note on Percolation”. In: Zeitschrift für Wahrscheinlichkeits-
           theorie und Verwandte Gebiete 43.1 (1978), pp. 39–48.
[RV14]     Rémi Rhodes and Vincent Vargas. “Gaussian Multiplicative Chaos and Appli-
           cations: A Review”. In: Probability Surveys 11 (2014), pp. 315–392.
[Sch00]    Oded Schramm. “Scaling Limits of Loop-Erased Random Walks and Uniform
           Spanning Trees”. In: Israel Journal of Mathematics 118.1 (2000), pp. 221–288.


                                         130
[Seg88]    G. B. Segal. “The Definition of Conformal Field Theory”. In: Differential
           Geometrical Methods in Theoretical Physics. Ed. by K. Bleuler and M. Werner.
           Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 1988, pp. 165–171.
[She05]    Scott Sheffield. “Random Surfaces”. In: Astérisque 304 (2005).
[She07]    Scott Sheffield. “Gaussian Free Fields for Mathematicians”. In: Probability
           Theory and Related Fields 139.3 (2007), pp. 521–541.
[She09]    Scott Sheffield. “Exploration Trees and Conformal Loop Ensembles”. In: Duke
           Mathematical Journal 147.1 (2009), pp. 79–129.
[Smi01]    Stanislav Smirnov. “Critical Percolation in the Plane: Conformal Invariance,
           Cardy’s Formula, Scaling Limits”. In: Comptes Rendus de l’Académie des
           Sciences - Series I - Mathematics 333.3 (2001), pp. 239–244.
[Smi10]    Stanislav Smirnov. “Conformal Invariance in Random Cluster Models. I. Hol-
           morphic Fermions in the Ising Model”. In: Annals of Mathematics 172.2 (2010),
           pp. 1435–1467.
[SS05]     Oded Schramm and Scott Sheffield. “Harmonic Explorer and Its Convergence
           to SLE4”. In: The Annals of Probability 33.6 (2005), pp. 2127–2148.
[STF79]    E. K. Sklyanin, L. A. Takhtadzhyan, and L. D. Faddeev. “Quantum Inverse
           Problem Method. I”. In: Theoretical and Mathematical Physics 40.2 (1979),
           pp. 688–706.
[SW12]     Scott Sheffield and Wendelin Werner. “Conformal Loop Ensembles: The Marko-
           vian Characterization and the Loop-Soup Construction”. In: Annals of Mathe-
           matics 176.3 (2012), pp. 1827–1917.
[SW78]     P.D. Seymour and D.J.A. Welsh. “Percolation Probabilities on the Square
           Lattice”. In: Annals of Discrete Mathematics. Vol. 3. Elsevier, 1978, pp. 227–
           245.
[Tes01]    J. Teschner. “Liouville Theory Revisited”. In: Classical and Quantum Gravity
           18 (2001), R153–R222.
[Tes19]    J. Teschner. “Liouville theory revisited”. In: Integrability: From Statistical
           Systems to Gauge Theory. Lecture Notes of the Les Houches Summer School
           106 (2019), pp. 60–120.
[Tes95]    Jörg Teschner. “On the Liouville Three-Point Function”. In: Physics Letters B
           363.1 (1995), pp. 65–70.
[Til07]    Béatrice de Tilière. “Scaling Limit of Isoradial Dimer Models and the Case
           of Triangular Quadri-Tilings”. In: Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincare (B)
           Probability and Statistics 43.6 (2007), pp. 729–750.
[WH31]     N. Wiener and E. Hopf. “Über eine Klasse Singülarer Integralgleichungen.” In:
           Sitzungsberichte der Berliner Akademie der Wissenschaften (1931), pp. 696–
           706.
[Wid65a]   B. Widom. “Equation of State in the Neighborhood of the Critical Point”. In:
           The Journal of Chemical Physics 43.11 (1965), pp. 3898–3905.
[Wid65b]   B. Widom. “Surface Tension and Molecular Correlations near the Critical
           Point”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 43.11 (1965), pp. 3892–3897.
[Wil71a]   Kenneth G. Wilson. “Renormalization Group and Critical Phenomena. I. Renor-
           malization Group and the Kadanoff Scaling Picture”. In: Physical Review B
           4.9 (1971), pp. 3174–3183.

                                          131
[Wil71b]   Kenneth G. Wilson. “Renormalization Group and Critical Phenomena. II.
           Phase-space Cell Analysis of Critical Behavior”. In: Physical Review B 4.9
           (1971), pp. 3184–3205.




                                        132
