                                                       A contour line of the




arXiv:1008.2447v1 [math.PR] 14 Aug 2010
                                                   continuum Gaussian free field
                                                      Oded Schramm                  Scott Sheffield


                                                                         Abstract
                                              Consider an instance h of the Gaussian free field on a simply con-
                                          nected planar domain D with boundary conditions −λ on one bound-
                                          ary arc
                                                pand λ on the complementary arc, where λ is the special con-
                                          stant π/8. We argue that even though h is defined only as a random
                                          distribution, and not as a function, it has a well-defined zero level line
                                          γ connecting the endpoints of these arcs, and the law of γ is SLE(4).
                                          We construct γ in two ways: as the limit of the chordal zero contour
                                          lines of the projections of h onto certain spaces of piecewise linear
                                          functions, and as the only path-valued function on the space of distri-
                                          butions with a natural Markov property.
                                              We also show that, as a function of h, γ is “local” (it does not
                                          change when h is modified away from γ) and derive some general
                                          properties of local sets.




                                                                              1
Contents
1 Introduction                                                              3
  1.1 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
  1.2 Notation and definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
  1.3 GFF approximations and discrete level lines . . . . . . . . . . 9
  1.4 Main results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

2 Coupling SLE and the GFF                                              13
  2.1 GFF on subdomains: projections and restrictions . . . . . . . 13
  2.2 Constructing the coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

3 Local sets                                                                 21
  3.1 Absolute continuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    21
  3.2 Local sets for discrete fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
  3.3 Local sets for the GFF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     26

4 Fine grid preliminaries                                                    30
  4.1 Subspaces are asymptotically dense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       30
  4.2 Topological and measure theoretic preliminaries . . . . . . . .        32
  4.3 Limits of discrete local sets are local . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    34
  4.4 Statement of the height gap lemma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        36

5 Proofs of main results                                                     37

6 Remark on other contour lines                                              42




                                      2
1     Introduction
1.1    Overview
The two dimensional Gaussian free field (GFF) is an object of central impor-
tance in mathematics and physics. It appears frequently as a model for ran-
dom surfaces and height interfaces and as a tool for studying two-dimensional
statistical physics models that are not obviously random surfaces (e.g., Ising
and Potts models, O(n) loop models). It appears in random matrix theory
(e.g. [RV07]), as a random electrostatic potential in Coulomb gas theory,
and as the starting point for many constructions in conformal field theory
and string theory. It is related to the Schramm-Loewner evolution (SLE)
in a range of ways [She05, Dub09, IK10, HBB10] (see Section 1.4) and it
represents the logarithmic conformal metric distortion in critical Liouville
quantum gravity (see details and references in [DS08]).
    This paper is a sequel to another paper by the current authors [SS09],
which contains a much more detailed overview of the topics mentioned above,
and many more references. That paper studied the discrete Gaussian free
field (DGFF), which is a random function on a graph that (when defined on
increasingly fine lattices) has the GFF as a scaling limit. The authors showed
in [SS09] that a certain level line of the DGFF has SLE(4) as a scaling limit.
    More precisely, when one defines the DGFF on a planar lattice graph with
triangular faces (interpolating the DGFF linearly on each triangle to produce
a continuous function on a domain in R2 ), with positive boundary conditions
on one boundary arc and negative boundary conditions on the complemen-
tary arc, the zero chordal contour line connecting the two endpoints of these
arcs converges in law (as the lattice size gets finer) to a variant of SLE(4).
In particular, there is a special constant λ > 0 such that if boundary condi-
tions are set to ±λ on the two boundary arcs, then the zero chordal contour
line converges to SLE(4) itself as the lattice size tends to zero. The ex-
act value of λ was not determined in [SS09], but we will determine it here.
Specifically, we will show that if the DGFF is scaled in such a way that its
fine-mesh limit Ris the continuum Gaussian
                                      p       free field (GFF), defined by the
                         2
Dirichlet normR |∇φ| , then λ = π/8. (Another common convention is
to take (2π)−1 |∇φ|2 for the Dirichlet√norm. Including the factor (2π)−1 is
equivalent to multiplying the GFF by 2π, which would make λ = π/2.)
    It was observed in [SS09] that one can project an instance h of the GFF
on a simply connected planar domain onto a sequence of subspaces to obtain

                                      3
a sequence of successively closer continuous and piecewise linear approxima-
tions to h, each of which has the law of a discrete Gaussian free field. Al-
though h is defined only as a distribution, and not as a continuous function,
one might hope to define the “contour lines” of h as the limits of the con-
tour lines of these approximations. The work in [SS09] implies that (when
the boundary conditions are ±λ on complementary arcs) the zero chordal
contour lines of the approximations converge in law to SLE(4). Our goal
is to strengthen these results and show that these contour lines converge in
probability to a path-valued function γ of h whose law is SLE(4). We will also
characterize γ directly by showing that it is the unique path-valued function
of h with a certain Markov property. In Section 3, we also show that, as a
function of h, γ is “local.” Very roughly speaking, this means that γ can
be determined without observing the values of h at points away from γ —
and thus, γ is not changed if h is modified away from γ. We will also give a
discrete definition of local and show that both discrete and continuum local
sets have nice properties.
    The reader may consult [SS09] for background and a historical introduc-
tion to the contour line problem for discrete and continuum Gaussian free
fields. We will forego such an introduction here and proceed directly to the
notation and the main results.
Acknowledgments. We wish to thank Vincent Beffara, Richard Kenyon,
Jané Kondev, Julien Dubédat, and David Wilson for inspiring and useful
conversations. In particular, Kenyon and the first author worked out a cou-
pling of the GFF and SLE(8) early on, which is quite similar to the coupling
between the GFF and SLE(4) presented here. We also thank Jason Miller
for helpful comments on a draft of this paper.
    This paper was mostly finished well before the tragic 2008 death of the
first author, Oded Schramm. The results were originally part of our first
draft of [SS09] (begun in 2003) and were separated once it became apparent
that [SS09] was becoming quite long for a journal paper. We presented them
informally in slides and online talks (e.g. [She05]) and mostly finished the
writing together. The completion of this project is a somewhat melancholy
occasion for the second author, as it concludes a long and enjoyable collab-
oration with an inspiring mathematician and a wonderful friend. It is also
another occasion to celebrate the memory of Oded Schramm.




                                      4
1.2    Notation and definitions
Let D be a planar domain (i.e., a connected open subset of R2 , which we
sometimes identify with the complex plane C). Assume further that D is a
subset of a simply connected domain that is not all of C. (In particular, this
implies that D can be mapped conformally to a subset of the unit disc.)
    For each x ∈ D, the point in ∂D at which a Brownian motion started at
x first exits D is a random variable whose law we denote by νx and call the
harmonic measure of ∂D viewed from x. It is not hard to show that for
any y ∈ D the measures νx and νy are absolutely continuous with respect to
one another, with a Radon Nikodym derivative bounded between two positive
constants. In particular, this implies that if a function f∂ : ∂D → R lies in
L1 (νx ) then it lies in L1 (νy ) for any y ∈ D. We refer to a function with this
property as a harmonically integrable function of ∂D. If f∂ : ∂D → R is
harmonically integrable, then the function
                                        Z
                                f (x) = f∂ (y)dνx (y),

defined on D, is called the harmonic extension of f∂ to D.
    GivenRa planar domain D and f, g ∈ L2 (D), we denote by (f, g) the inner
product f (x)g(x)dx (where dx is Lebesgue measure on D). Let Hs (D)
denote the space of real-valued C ∞ , compactly supported functions on D.
We also write H(D) (a.k.a., H01 (D) — a Sobolev space) for the Hilbert space
completion of Hs (D) under the Dirichlet inner product
                                     Z
                          (f, g)∇ :=   ∇f · ∇g dx.
                                       D

                                                   1/2
We write kf k := (f, f )1/2 and kf k∇ := (f, f )∇ . If f, g ∈ Hs (D), then
integration by parts gives (f, g)∇ = (f, −∆g).
    Let φ be a conformal map from D to another domain D ′ . Then an
elementary change of variables calculation shows that
            Z                                  Z
                        −1            −1
                ∇(f1 ◦ φ ) · ∇(f2 ◦ φ ) dx = (∇f1 · ∇f2 ) dx.
              D′                                  D

In other words, the Dirichlet inner product is invariant under conformal
transformations.
    It is conventional to use Hs (D) as a space of test functions. This space
is a topological vector space in which the topology is defined so that φk → 0

                                       5
in Hs (D) if and only if there is a compact set on which all of the φk are
supported and the mth derivative of φk converges uniformly to zero for each
integer m ≥ 1.
    A distribution on D is a continuous linear functional on Hs (D). Since
Hs (D) ⊂ L2 (D), we may view every h ∈ L2 (D) as a distribution p 7→ (h, p).
We will frequently abuse notation and use h — or more precisely the map
denoted by p → (h, p) — to represent a general distribution (which is a
functional of p), even though h may not correspond to an element in L2 (D).
We define partial derivatives and integrals of distributions in the usual way
                                    ∂                ∂
(via integration by parts), i.e., ( ∂x h, p) := −(h, ∂x p); in particular, if h is a
distribution then ∆h is a distribution defined by (∆h, p) := (h, ∆p). When
h is a distribution and g ∈ Hs (D), we also write

                        (h, g)∇ := (−∆h, g) = (h, −∆g).

    When x ∈ D is fixed, we let G̃x (y) be the harmonic extension to D of
the function on ∂D given by (2 π)−1 log |y − x|. (It is not hard to see that
this function is harmonically integrable.) Then Green’s function in the
domain D is defined by

                     G(x, y) = (2 π)−1 log |y − x| − G̃x (y).

When x ∈ D is fixed, Green’s function may be viewed as a distributional
solution of ∆G(x, ·) = −δx (·) with zero boundary conditions. Note, however,
that under the above definition it is not generally true that G(x, ·) extends
continuously to a function on D that vanishes on ∂D (e.g., if ∂D contains
isolated points, then G(x, ·) need not tend to zero at those points) although
this will be the case if D is simplyR        connected. For any p ∈ Hs (D), we
write −∆ p for the function D G(·, y) p(y) dy. This is a C ∞ (though not
            −1

necessarily compactly supported) function in D whose Laplacian is −p.
     If f1 = −∆−1 p1 and f2 = −∆−1 p2 , then integration by parts gives
(f1 , f2 )∇ = (p1 , −∆−1 p2 ). By the definition of −∆−1 p2 above, the latter ex-
pression may be rewritten as
                          Z
                                 p1 (x) p2 (y) G(x, y) dx dy ,              (1.1)
                          D×D

where G(x, y) is Green’s function in D. Another wayR to say this is that,
since ∆G(x, ·) = −δx (·), integration by parts gives D G(x, y) p2(y) dy =

                                         6
−∆−1 p2 (x), and we obtain (1.1) by multiplying each side by p1 (x) and inte-
grating with respect to x.
    We next observe that every h ∈ H(D) is naturally a distribution, since
we may define the map (h, ·) by (h, p) := (h, −∆−1 p)∇ . (It is not hard to see
that −∆−1 p ∈ H(D), since its Dirichlet energy is given explicitly by (1.1);
see [She03] for more details.)
    An instance of the GFF    P with zero boundary conditions on D is a ran-
dom sum of the form h = ∞        j=1 αj fj where the αj are i.i.d. one-dimensional
standard (unit variance, zero mean) real Gaussians and the fj are an or-
thonormal basis
              P for 2H(D). This sum almost surely does not converge within
H(D) (since      |αj | is a.s. infinite). However, it does converge
                                                             P∞ almost surely
within the space of distributions — that is, the limit ( i=1 αj fj , p) almost
surely exists for all p ∈ Hs (D), and the limiting value as a function of p is
almost surely a continuous functional on Hs (D) [She03]. We view h as a
sample from the measure space (Ω, F ) where Ω = ΩD is the set of distribu-
tions on D and F is the smallest σ-algebra that makes (h, p) measurable for
each p ∈ Hs (D), and we denote by µ = µD the probability measure which is
the law of h. The following is a standard and straightforward result about
Gaussian processes [She03]:

Proposition 1.1. The GFF with zero boundary conditions on D is the only
random distribution h on D with the property that for each p ∈ Hs (D) the
random variable (h, p) = (h, −∆−1 p)∇ is a mean zero Gaussian with variance
(−∆−1 p, −∆−1 p)∇ = (p, −∆−1 p). In particular, the law of h is independent
of the choice of basis {fj } in the definition above.

    Given a harmonically integrable function h∂ : ∂D → R, the GFF with
boundary conditions h∂ is the random distribution whose law is that of
the GFF with zero boundary conditions plus the deterministic function h∂
which is the harmonic interpolation of h∂ to D (viewing h∂ as a distribution).
    Suppose g ∈ Hs (D) and write p := −∆g. If h is a GFF with boundary
conditions h∂ (and h∂ is the harmonic extension of h∂ to D), then we may
integrate by parts and write (h, p) = (h∂ , p) + (h, g)∇ . Note that (h∂ , p) is
deterministic while the latter term, (h, g)∇ does not depend on h∂ . Then the
random variables (h, p), for p ∈ ∆Hs (D), have means (h∂ , p) and covariances
given by
                                               Z
                                       −1
    Cov ((h, p1 ), (h, p2 )) = (p1 , −∆ p2 ) =    p1 (x) p2 (y) G(x, y) dx dy ,
                                              D×D


                                        7
where G(x, y) is Green’s function in D.
    Green’s function in the upper half plane is G(x, y) = (2 π)−1 log x−y     x−y
(where x is the complex conjugate of x), since the right hand side is zero
when y ∈ R and is the sum of −(2 π)−1 log |x − y| and a function harmonic
in y. (Note that G(x, y) > 0 for all x, y ∈ H.) In physical Coulomb gas mod-
els, when p represents the density functionR of a (signed) electrostatic charge
distribution, the quantity (p, −∆−1 p) = D×D p(x) p(y) G(x, y) dx dy is some-
times called the electrostatic potential energy or energy of assembly
of p (assuming the system is grounded at the boundary of D).
    If φ is a conformal map from D to a domain D̃ and h is a distribution on
D, then we define the pullback h ◦ φ−1 of h to be the distribution h̃ on D̃ for
which (h̃, p̃) = (h, p) whenever p ∈ Hs (D) and p̃ = |φ′|−2 p ◦ φ−1 , where φ′ is
the complex derivative of φ (viewing the latter as an analytic function on a
subset of C).
    Note that if p is interpreted in the physical sense as an electrostatic charge
density on D and φ is a change-of-coordinates map, then p̃ is the correspond-
ing charge density on D̃. The reader may also observe that if h is a function
in H(D), interpreted as a distribution as discussed above, then the function
h◦φ−1 ∈ H(D̃), interpreted as a distribution, agrees with the definition given
above.
    Also, if f ∈ H(D) and p = −∆f ∈ Hs (D), then we have the following:
       (h, f )∇ = (h, p) = (h ◦ φ−1 , |φ′ |−2 p ◦ φ−1 ) = (h ◦ φ−1 , f ◦ φ−1 )∇ ,
where the last equality follows from the simple calculus fact that
                           −∆(f ◦ φ−1 ) = |φ′ |−2 p ◦ φ−1 .
This and Proposition 1.1 imply the conformal invariance of the GFF: i.e., if
h has the law of a GFF on D, then h ◦ φ−1 has the law of a GFF on D̃.
    In addition to defining an instance h of the GFF with zero boundary
conditions as a random distribution, it is also occasionally useful to define
the random variables (h, g)∇ for all g ∈ H(D) (and not merely g ∈ Hs (D)).
Suppose that an orthonormal basis {fj } for H(D), made up of elements in
Hs (D), is fixed and we write αj = (h, fj )∇ . Then the αj are i.i.d. Gaussians
and for each fixed g ∈ H(D) the sum
                                          ∞
                                          X              
                             (h, g)∇ :=         αj fj , g ∇
                                          j=1


                                           8
converges almost surely. The collection of Gaussian random variables (h, g)∇ ,
with g ∈ H(D) (defined as limits of partial sums) is a Hilbert space under
the covariance inner product. Replacing {fj } with another orthonormal basis
for H(D) only changes the random variable (h, g)∇ on a set of measure zero
[She03]. Thus, for each fixed g ∈ H(D), it makes sense to think of the random
variable (h, g)∇ as a real-valued function of Ω (which is canonically defined
up to redefinition on a set of measure zero). This Hilbert space of random
variables is a closed subspace of L2 (Ω, F , µ). The covariance of (h, g1 )∇ and
(h, g2 )∇ is equal to (g1 , g2 )∇ , so this Hilbert space is naturally isomorphic to
H(D) [She03, Jan97]. (In general, a collection of centered Gaussian random
variables which is a Hilbert space under the covariance inner product is called
a Gaussian Hilbert space [Jan97].)

1.3    GFF approximations and discrete level lines
In order to construct contour lines of an instance h of the Gaussian free field,
it will be useful to approximate h by a continuous function which is linear
on each triangle in a triangular grid. We now describe a special case of the
approximation scheme used in [SS09]. (The results in [SS09] also apply to
more general periodic triangulations of R2 .) Let T G be the triangular grid
in the plane C ∼ = R2√, i.e., the graph whose vertex set is the integer span of
         πi/3
1 and e       = (1 + 3 i)/2, with straight edges joining v and w whenever
|v − w| = 1. A T G-domain D ⊂ R2 is a domain whose boundary is a simple
closed curve comprised of edges and vertices in T G.
    Fix some λ > 0. Let D be any T G-domain, and let ∂+ ⊂ ∂D be an arc
whose endpoints are distinct midpoints of edges of T G. Let V denote the
vertices of T G in D. Set ∂− := ∂D r ∂+ . Let h∂ : V ∩ ∂D → R take the
value − λ on ∂− ∩ V and λ on ∂+ ∩ V . Let φD be any conformal map from
D to the upper half-plane H that maps ∂+ onto the positive real ray.
    Let h0 be an instance of the GFF on H with zero boundary conditions.
By conformal invariance of the Dirichlet inner product, h0 ◦ φD has the law of
a GFF on D. Let HT G (D) be the subspace of H(D) comprised of continuous
functions that are affine on each T G triangle in D, and let h0D be the orthog-
onal projection of h0 onto HT G (D) with respect to the inner product (·, ·)∇ .
That is, h0D is the random element of HT G(D) for which (h0 , ·)∇ and (h0D , ·)∇
are equivalent as linear functionals on HT G(D) . (The former is defined almost
surely from the Gaussian Hilbert space perspective, as discussed above; the
given definition of this projection depends on the choice of basis {fj }, but

                                         9
changing the basis affects the definition only on a set of measure zero.)
    We may view h0D as a function on the vertices of T G ∩ D, linearly in-
terpolated on each triangle [SS09]. Up to multiplicative constant, the law
of h0D is that of the discrete Gaussian free field on the graph T G ∩ D with
zero boundary conditions on the vertices in ∂D [SS09]. Let hD be h0D plus
the (linearly interpolated) discrete harmonic (w.r.t the usual discrete Lapla-
cian) extension of h∂ to V ∩ D. Thus, hD is precisely the discrete field for
which [SS09] proves that the chordal interface of hD ◦φ−1
                                                       D converges to SLE(4)
for an appropriate choice of λ.
    Now h(z) = h0 (z) + λ (1 − 2π −1 arg(z)) is an instance of the GFF on H
with boundary conditions −λ on the negative reals and λ on the positive
reals, as λ (1 − 2π −1 arg(z)) is the harmonic function with this boundary
data. The functions hD ◦ φ−1 D may be viewed as approximations to h.
    There is almost surely a zero contour line γD (with no fixed parametriza-
                                                                bD := φD ◦γD
tion) of hD on D that connects the endpoints of ∂− and ∂+ , and γ
is a random path in H connecting 0 to ∞. We are interested in the limit of
the paths γbD as D gets larger. The correct sense of “large” is measured by

                             rD := radφ−1 (i) (D) ,
                                         D


where radx (D) denotes the radius of D viewed from x, i.e., inf y6∈D |x − y|.
Of course, if φ−1D (i) is at bounded distance from ∂D, then the image of
the triangular grid under φD is not fine near i, and there is no hope for
approximating SLE(4) by γbD .
    We have chosen to use H as our canonical domain (mapping all other
paths into H), because it is the most convenient domain in which to define
chordal SLE. When describing distance between paths, it is often more
natural to use the disc or another bounded domain. To get the best of both
worlds, we will endow H with the metric it inherits from its conformal map
onto the disc U. Namely, we let d∗ (·, ·) be the metric on H ∪ {∞} given by
d∗ (z, w) = |Ψ(z) − Ψ(w)|, where Ψ(z) := (z − i)/(z + i) maps H ∪ {∞} onto
U. (Here H denotes the Euclidean closure of H.) If z ∈ H, then d∗ (zn , z) → 0
is equivalent to |zn − z| → 0, and d∗ (zn , ∞) → 0 is equivalent to |zn | → ∞.
    Let Λ be the set of continuous functions W : [0, ∞) → R which satisfy
W0 = 0. We endow Λ with the topology of uniform convergence on compact
intervals—i.e., the topology generated by the sets of the form {W : |Wt −Vt | <
ǫ when 0 ≤ t ≤ T } for some Vt ∈ Λ and ǫ > 0 and T > 0. Let L be the
corresponding Borel σ-algebra.

                                      10
   For each W ∈ Λ, we may define the Loewner maps gt from subsets of H
to H via the ODE
                                        2
                    ∂t gt (z) =               ,   g0 (z) = z .             (1.2)
                                  gt (z) − Wt

    When gt−1 extends continuously to Wt , we write γ(t) := gt−1(Wt ). Gener-
ally, we write τ (z) to be the largest t for which the ODE describing gt (z) is
defined, and Kt = {z ∈ H : τ (z) ≤ t}. So Kt is a closed subset of H, and gt
is a conformal map from H r Kt to H.
    Let ΛC ⊂ Λ be the set of W for which γ : [0, ∞) → H is well defined
for all t ∈ [0, ∞) and is a continuous path. The metric on paths given by
dSTRONG (γ1 , γ2 ) = supt≥0 d∗ (γ1 (t), γ2 (t)) induces a corresponding metric on
ΛC .

1.4    Main results
The first of our two main results constructs a “zero contour line of h” as the
limit of the contour lines of the approximations described above:
                                     p
Theorem 1.2. Suppose that λ = π/8. As rD → ∞, the random paths
bD = φD ◦ γD described above, viewed as ΛC -valued random variables on
γ
(Ω, F ), converge in probability (with respect to the metric dSTRONG on ΛC )
to an (Ω, F )-measurable random path γ ∈ ΛC that is distributed like SLE(4).
In other words, for every ǫ > 0 there is some R = R(ǫ) such that if rD > R,
then                    h                         i
                      P dSTRONG γ(t), γ bD (t) > ǫ < ǫ .

    The theorem shows, in particular, that the random path γ is a.s. deter-
mined by h. It will be called the zero contour line of h. We will actually
initially construct γ in Section 2 in a way that does not involve discrete
approximations. This construction is rather interesting. In some sense, we
reverse the procedure. Rather than constructing γ from h, we start with a
chordal SLE(4) path γ and define h̃ as the field that is the GFF with bound-
ary values λ in the connected component of Hrγ having R+ on its boundary
plus a conditionally independent (given γ) GFF with boundary values −λ in
the other connected component of H r γ. We then show that h̃ has the same
law as h, effectively giving a coupling of h and γ. Much later, in Section 5,
we will show that in this coupling γ is a.s. determined by h; that is, it is

                                          11
equal a.s. to a certain F -measurable ΛC -valued function of h. We will then
prove Theorem 1.3 (stated below), which characterizes the zero contour line
of h in terms of conditional expectations.
    In order to make sense of the theorem stated below, we will need the fact
that the GFF on a subdomain of H makes sense as a random distribution
on H—and not just a random distribution on the subdomain. We will see in
Section 2.2 that the GFF on a simply connected subdomain of H is indeed
canonically defined as a random distribution on H.
    Consider a random variable (h̃, W̃ ) in (Ω×Λ, F ×L). Let g̃t : Hr K̃t → H
denote the Loewner evolution corresponding to W̃ . Write
                                                              
                    h̃t (z) := λ 1 − 2 π −1 arg(g̃t (z) − Wt ) .          (1.3)

(This is the harmonic function on H r K̃t with boundary values −λ on the
left side of the tip of the Loewner evolution and +λ on the right side.)
Theorem 1.3. Let D = H and suppose that for some λ > 0 a random
variable (h̃, W̃ ) in (Ω × Λ, F × L) satisfies the following conformal Markov
property. For every fixed T ∈ [0, ∞) we have that given the restriction of W̃t
to [0, T ], a regular conditional law for h̃ on Hs (H r K̃T ) is given by h̃T , as
in (1.3), plus a zero boundary GFF on H r K̃T . Then the following hold
             p
   1. λ = π/8.
  2. The trace of the Loewner evolution is almost surely a path γ̃ with the
     law of an SLE(4) (i.e., W̃ is 2 times a standard Brownian motion).
  3. Conditioned on h̃, the function W̃ is almost surely completely deter-
     mined (i.e., there exists a Λ-valued function on Ω such that W̃ is almost
     surely equal to the value of that function applied to h̃).
  4. The pair (h̃, γ̃) has the same law as the pair (h, γ) from Theorem 1.2.
    Another derivation of the SLE(κ)-GFF coupling in Theorem 1.3 appears
in [Dub09], which references our work in progress and also explores relation-
ships between this coupling and continuum partition functions, Laplacian
determinants, and the Polyakov-Alvarez conformal anomaly formula. The
couplings in [She05, Dub09] are in fact more general than those given here;
they are defined for general κ, and are characterized by conformal Markov
properties similar to those in Theorem 1.3. The SLE(κ) curves in these cou-
plings are local sets (in the sense of Section 3) and are interpreted in [She05]

                                       12
as “flow lines of eih ” where h is a multiple of the GFF and eih is viewed as a
complex unit vector field (which is well defined when h is smooth, and in a
certain sense definable even when h is a multiple of the GFF). Indeed, these
examples were the primary motivation for our definition of local sets.


2     Coupling SLE and the GFF
2.1      GFF on subdomains: projections and restrictions
Proposition 2.1. Suppose that H ′ (D) is a closed subspace of H(D), that P
is the orthogonal projection onto that subspace, and that {fj } is an orthonor-
mal basis for H(D). Let αP  j be i.i.d. mean zero, unit variance normal random
variables. Then the sum        P (αj fj ) converges almost surely in the space of
distributions on D. The law of the limit is the unique law of a random dis-
tribution h on D with the property that for each p ∈ Hs (D), the random
variable (h, p) is a centered Gaussian with variance ||P (−∆−1 p)||2∇ .
Proof. For each fixed p ∈ Hs (D), the fact that the partial sums of
    X                 X                     
         P (αj fj ), p =    P (αj fj ), −∆−1 p
                                                ∇
                          X                     X                
                                          −1                    −1
                        =    αj fj , P (−∆ p) =    αj fj , P (−∆ p)
                                                ∇                            ∇

converge to a random variable with variance ||P (−∆−1 p)||2∇ is immediate
from the fact that P (−∆−1 p) ∈ H(D).
    To complete the proof, we recall the P   approach of [She03] (which uses
earlier work in [Gro67]) for showing that      αj fj converges in the space of
distributions. Consider a norm k · k∗ of the form kf k2∗ = (T f, f )∇ where
T is a Hilbert-Schmidt operator P      mapping H(D) to itself—i.e., for each
basis {fj } of H(D) we have        kT fj k2∇ < ∞. (The sum is independent
of the choice of basis.) Then Gross’s classical abstract Wiener space
                P the closure of H(D) with respect to the norm k · k∗ is a
result implies that
space in which     αj fj converges almost surely [Gro67]. In [She03] a Hilbert-
Schmidt operator T was given such that this closure was contained in the
space of distributions (and such that convergence in the norm implied weak
convergence in the space of distributions). For our purposes, it suffices to
observe that if T is a Hilbert-Schmidt operator on H(D) then T ′ = P T is
a Hilbert-Schmidt operator and kf k′∗ = (T ′ f, f )∇ is a measurable norm on

                                       13
H ′ (D). The existence and uniqueness of the random distribution described
in the proposition statement then follows by the standard abstract Wiener
space construction in [Gro67] as described in [She03].
   For any deterministic open subset B of D, we denote by SuppB the closure
in H(D) of the space of C ∞ functions compactly supported on B and we
denote by HarmB the orthogonal complement of SuppB , so that

                         H(D) = SuppB ⊕ HarmB .

Note that since (f, g)∇ = (−∆f, g), a smooth function f ∈ H(D) satisfies
f ∈ HarmB if and only if −∆f = 0 (so that f is harmonic) on B. In
general, if f is any distribution on D, we say that f is harmonic on B if
(−∆f, g) := (f, −∆g) = 0 for all g ∈ SuppB . By this definition HarmB
consists of precisely of those elements of H(D) which are harmonic on B.
If f is a distribution which is harmonic on B, then the restriction of f to
B may be viewed as an actual harmonic function—i.e., there is a harmonic
function f˜ on B such that for all p ∈ Hs (B) we have (f, p) = (f˜, p). We
may construct f˜ explicitly as follows. For each z ∈ B, write f˜(z) = (f, p)
where p is any positive radially symmetric bump function centered at z whose
integral is one and whose support lies in B. By harmonicity, this value is
the same for any p with these properties, since the difference of two such p
is the Laplacian of a (radially symmetric about z) function in Hs (B). The
fact that this function f˜ is harmonic is easy to verify from its definition.
    Suppose that B is a subdomain of a simply connected planar domain
D. It will often be useful for us to interpret the GFF with zero boundary
conditions on B as a random distribution on D. This means that we have
to make sense of (h, p) when p ∈ Hs (D) but we do not necessarily have
p ∈ Hs (B). The following is immediate from Proposition 2.1, taking H ′ (D)
to be SuppB .

Proposition 2.2. Let B be a subdomain of a planar domain D. There is
a unique law for a random distribution hB on D with the property that for
each p ∈ Hs (D) the random variable (hB , p) is a mean zero Gaussian with
variance              Z
                           p(x) p(y) GB (x, y) dx dy.
                         B×B

    If we restrict the pairing (h, ·) of the above proposition to functions on
Hs (B), then by definition h is the GFF on B with zero boundary conditions.

                                     14
The projection of the GFF onto HarmB is a random distribution which is
almost surely harmonic on B. Applying Proposition 2.1 to HarmB gives the
following straightforward analog of Proposition 2.2. (Here ∆B denotes the
Laplacian restricted to B, and ∆−1
                                B p has Laplacian p on B and zero boundary
conditions on ∂B.)
Proposition 2.3. Let B be a subdomain of a planar domain D. There
is a unique random distribution h∗B on D with the property that for each
p ∈ Hs (D) the random variable (h∗B , p) is a mean zero Gaussian with variance
                         (p, −∆−1 p) − (p, −∆−1
                                             B p)B .                       (2.1)
An instance of the GFF on D may be written as h = hB + h∗B where hB is
the zero boundary GFF on B and h∗B and hB are independent.
    Although the above defines h∗B as a random distribution and not as a
function, we may, as discussed above, consider the restriction of h∗B to B
as a harmonic function. This function intuitively represents the conditional
expectation of h at points of B given the values of h off of B.

2.2    Constructing the coupling
The overall goal of the paper is to recognize SLE(4) as an interface determined
by the GFF. In this subsection we show how to start with an SLE(4) and
use it to explicitly construct an instance of the GFF such that the resulting
coupling of SLE(4) and the GFF satisfies the hypothesis of Theorem 1.3.
     For any Loewner evolution Wt on the half plane H we may write ft (z) :=
gt (z) − Wt . Since arg z is a harmonic function on H with boundary values 0
on (0, ∞) and π on (−∞, 0), the value π −1 arg ft (z) is the probability that a
two dimensional Brownian motion starting at z first exits H r γ[0, t] either
in (−∞, 0) or on the left hand side of γ[0, t]. In other words, for fixed t, the
function π −1 arg ft (z) is the bounded harmonic function on H r γ[0, t] with
boundary values given by 1 on the left side of the tip γ(t) and 0 on the right
side.
Lemma 2.4. Let Bt be a standard 1-dimensional Brownian motion, and let
Wt = 2 Bt be the driving parameter of an SLE(4) evolution gt . Set ft (x) :=
gt (z) − Wt and ht := λ (1 − 2 π −1 arg(ft )). Then for each fixed z ∈ H,
                                  4λ
                      dht (z) =      Im (ft (z)−1 ) dBt ,                  (2.2)
                                  π
                                        15
(in the sense of Itô differentials) and ht (z) is a martingale.
    The function 4λ  π
                       Im (ft (z)−1 ) is significant. At time t = 0, it is a negative
harmonic function whose level sets are circles in H that are tangent to R at
W0 = 0. Intuitively, it represents the harmonic measure (times a negative
constant) of the tip of Kt as seen from the point z. When Wt moves an in-
finitesimal amount to the left or right, ht changes by an infinitesimal multiple
of this function.
                       √
Proof. If dWt = κ dBt , then the Itô derivatives of ft and log ft are as
follows:
                  2
            dft = dt − dWt ,
                  ft
                                            κ           (4 − k)
       d log ft = 2 ft−2 dt − ft−1 dWt − ft−2 dt =              dt − ft−1 dWt .
                                            2             2ft2
It is a special feature of κ = 4 that d log ft = −2ft−1 dBt ; hence ht (z) is a
local martingale and (since it is bounded) a martingale.
   In what follows we use bracket notation hXt , Yt i := hX, Y it to denote the
cross-variation product of time-varying processes X and Y up to time t, i.e.,
                                   k
                                   X
                 hX, Y it := lim         (Xsi − Xsi−1 )(Ysi − Ysi−1 ),
                                   i=1

where the limit is taken over increasingly dense finite sequences s0 = 0 <
s1 < . . . < sk = t. Sometimes, we find it convenient to write hXt , Yt i in
place of hX, Y it . In particular, we have almost surely hBt , Bt i = t and
hBt , ti = ht, Bt i = ht, ti = 0 for all t ≥ 0.
Lemma 2.5. Suppose that Wt is the driving parameter of an SLE(4) and
                                                
                     ht := λ 1 − 2π −1 arg(ft )
                                               x−y
(as in Lemma 2.4). Let G(x, y) = (2π)−1 log x−y       be Green’s function in the
upper half plane and write Gt (x, y) = G(fp
                                          t (x), ft (y)) when x and y are both
in H r Kt . If x, y ∈ H are fixed and λ = π/8, then the following holds for
all t almost surely:
                        dGt (x, y) = −dhht (x), ht (y)i.                (2.3)
                                           S
   Recall that for κ = 4 we have x ∈    / t>0 Kt a.s. for every x ∈ H [RS05].
Therefore, Gt (x, y) is a.s. well defined for all t.

                                            16
Proof. We first claim that
                                                         
               2 π dGt (x, y) = −4 Im ft (x)−1 Im ft (y)−1 dt.                (2.4)

We derive (2.4) explicitly using Itô calculus as follows (recalling that gt (x) −
gt (y) = ft (x) = ft (y)):

   2 π dGt (x, y) = −d Re log[gt (x) − gt (y)] + d Re log[gt (x) − gt (y)]
                          ft (x)−1 − ft (y)−1
                  = −2 Re                      dt +
                             ft (x) − ft (y)
                                                   −1
                                   ft (x)−1 − ft (y)
                            2 Re                     dt
                                  ft (x) − ft (y)
                                                                    −1 
                   = 2 Re ft (x)−1 ft (y)−1 dt − 2 Re ft (x)−1 ft (y)      dt
                                  −1            −1
                                                   
                   = 4 Re i ft (x) Im [ft (y) ] dt
                                                    
                   = −4 Im ft (x)−1 Im ft (y)−1 dt .
                                                   
                                                 4λ 2
                                                                              
   Using (2.2), we have dhht (x), ht (y)i =           Im   ft (x)−1 Im ft (y)−1 dt.
            p                                    π
Setting λ = π/8, we obtain (2.3).
                                                     R
    Next fix some p ∈ Hs (H) and write Et (p) := Gt (x, y) p(x) p(y) dx dy for
the electrostatic potential energy of p in H r Kt . For each t, the function ht
is not well defined on all of H (since it is not defined on Kt ), but it is defined
(and harmonic and bounded between −λ and λ) almost everywhere     R         almost
surely. In particular, when p ∈ Hs (H), the integral (ht , p) = H ht (x) p(x) dx
is well defined, so we may view ht as a distribution.
                                                           p
Lemma 2.6. In the setting of Lemma 2.5, assume λ = π/8. If p ∈ Hs (H),
then (ht , p) is a martingale. Moreover,
                               Z                         
    dh(ht , p), (ht , p)i = −d    p(x) p(y) Gt(x, y) dx dy = −dEt (p).        (2.5)

In other words, (ht , p) is a Brownian motion when parameterized by minus
the electrostatic potential energy of p in HrKt . More generally, when p1 , p2 ∈
Hs (D), we have
                                          Z                             
           dh(ht , p1 ), (ht , p2 )i = −d    p1 (x) p2 (y) Gt(x, y) dx dy . (2.6)


                                          17
Proof. The right equality in (2.5) is true by definition, so it is enough
to prove (2.6). Since both sides of (2.6) are bilinear in p1 and p2 , we lose
no generality in assuming that p1 and p2 are non-negative. (Note that any
p ∈ Hs (D) can be written p1 − p2 for some non-negative p1 , p2 ∈ Hs (D);
simply choose p1 to be any non-negative element of Hs (D) which dominates
p and set p2 = p1 − p.)
   Jason Miller has pointed out in private communication a very simple
way to obtain (2.6). Since (ht , pi ) are continuous martingales, the (non-
decreasing) process on the LHS of (2.6) is characterized by the fact that

                     (ht , p1 )(ht , p2 ) − h(ht , p1 ), (ht , p2 )i

is a martingale. Plugging in the RHS, we have now only to show that
                                      Z                              
             (ht , p1 )(ht , p2 ) + d    p1 (x) p2 (y) Gt(x, y) dx dy   (2.7)

is a martingale. By (2.3)

                         ht (x)ht (y) + Gt (x, y) dx dy

is a martingale for fixed x and y in H. These martingales are uniformly
bounded above for x and y in the support of the pi (since Gt (x, y) is non-
increasing and ht (·) is bounded). Since (2.7) is a weighted average of these
martingales, Fubini’s theorem implies that (2.7) is itself a martingale.
    Our original argument invoked a stochastic Fubini theorem (we used the
one in [Pro90, §IV.4]) and was longer and less self contained.
    Now, define h∞ (z) = limt→∞ ht (z), G∞ (x, y) = limt→∞ Gt (x, y), and
E∞ (p) = limt→∞ Et (p). (The limit exists almost surely for fixed z since
ht (z) is a bounded martingale; it can also be deduced for all z from the con-
tinuity of the SLE trace.) The reader may check that for fixed x, h∞ (x) is
almost surely ±λ depending on whether x is to the left or right of γ.
    Similarly, since Gt (x, y) and Et (p) are decreasing functions of t, these
limits also exist almost surely. The statement of the following lemma makes
use of these definitions and implicitly assumes Proposition 2.2 (namely, the
fact that the zero boundary GFF on an arbitrary subdomain of H has a
canonical definition as a random distribution on H).
                                                                p
Lemma 2.7. Assume the setting of Lemma 2.5 and λ =                 π/8. Let h̃
be equal to h∞ (as defined above) plus a sum of independent zero-boundary

                                          18
GFF’s, one in each component of H r γ. Then the law of h̃ is that of a
GFF in H with boundary conditions −λ and λ on the negative and positive
real axes. In fact, the pair (h̃, W ) constructed in this way (where W is the
Loewner driving parameter of γ) satisfies the hypothesis of Theorem 1.3.
Proof. For each p ∈ Hs (D) the random variable (h̃, p) is a sum of (h∂ , p), a
Brownian motion started at time zero and stopped at time E0 (p) − E∞ (p),
and a Gaussian of variance E∞ (p). Thus its law is Gaussian with mean
(h∂ , p) and variance E0 (p). The fact that random variables (h̃, p) have these
laws for any p ∈ Hs (H) implies that h̃ is a GFF with the given boundary
conditions by Proposition 1.1. A similar argument applies if we replace h0
with ht for any stopping time t of Wt , and this implies that (h̃, γ) satisfies
the hypothesis of Theorem 1.3.
   We can now prove part of Theorem 1.3.
Lemma 2.8. Suppose that (h̃, W ) is a random variable whose law is a cou-
pling of the GFF on H (with ±λ boundary conditions as above) and a real-
valued process W = Wt defined for t ≥ 0 that satisfies  √ the hypothesis of
Theorem 1.3. Then the marginal law of W is that of 4 times a Brown-
ian motion
     p       (so that the Loewner evolution generated by W is SLE(4)) and
λ = π/8.
Proof. Let p ∈ Hs (H) be non-negative but not identically zero. We first
claim that the hypothesis of Lemma 2.8 implies the conclusion of Lemma 2.6,
namely that (h̃t , p) is a Brownian motion when parameterized by −Et (p).
     Write u = u(t) = −Et (p). It is easy to see that u(t) is continuous and
strictly increasing in t, at least up to the first time that Kt intersects the
support of p. Write F (·) for the inverse of u(·).
     Fix some constant T > 0. We define a process B by writing B(u) =
(h̃F (u) , p) whenever F (u) < T . After time u0 = sup{u : F (u) < T }, we let
B evolve (independently of W ) according to the law of a standard Brownian
motion until time E0 (p) (so that given B up until time u0 , the conditional
law of B(u) − B(u0 )—for each u ≥ u0 —is a centered Gaussian of variance
u − u0 ). Because, given W , the conditional law of (h, p) is a Gaussian with
variance E0 (p) − u0 , we may couple this process B with h̃ in such a way
B(E0 (p)) = (h, p) almost surely.
     Now, we claim that B is a standard Brownian motion on the interval
[0, E0 (p)]. To see this, note that for each fixed U > 0, the conditional law of
B(E0 (p)) − B(U) (given B(u) for u ≤ U) is that of a Gaussian of variance

                                      19
E0 (p) − U (independently of B(u) for u ≤ U). It is a general fact (easily seen
by taking characteristic functions) that if X and Y are independent random
variables, and X and X + Y are Gaussian, then so is Y . Thus, B(U) is a
Gaussian of variance U that is independent of B(V ) − B(U) for each V > U,
and B(V ) − B(U) is a Gaussian of variance V − U. Since B is clearly almost
surely continuous, this implies that B is a Brownian motion on [0, E0 (p)].
    Now, for each fixed z ∈ H, if we take p to be a positive, symmetric bump
function centered at z (with total integral one), then the harmonicity of h̃t
implies that (h̃t , p) = h̃t (z) provided that the support of p does not intersect
Kt . This implies that h̃t (z) is a continuous martingale up until the first time
that Kt intersects the support of p. Since we may take the support of p
to be arbitrarily small (and since h̃t is bounded between ±λ), this implies
that h̃t (z) is a continuous martingale and is in fact a Brownian motion when
parameterized by E0 (p) − Et (p). The latter quantity satisfies

                     E0 (p) − Et (p) = (p, −∆−1 p + ∆−1
                                                     t p),

where ∆t is the Laplacian restricted to H r Kt . Since −∆−1 p + ∆−1  t p is
harmonic on H r Kt , we have (provided Kt does not intersect the support of
p),
                                                       
                 E0 (p) − Et (p) = ∆−1 p − ∆−1 t p, δz
                                                        
                                 = p, ∆−1 δz − ∆−1t δz ,

which is the value of the harmonic function ∆−1 δz − ∆−1    t δz at the point z,
which is easily seen to be the log of the modulus of the derivative at z of a
conformal map from H r Kt to H that fixes z.
      In order to prove the lemma, by Lemma 2.5 it is now enough to show that
 the fact that h̃t (z) is a Brownian motion under the time parameterization
 described above determines the law of Wt . At this point is is convenient
to change to radial coordinates. Let Ψ be a conformal map from H to the
unit disc D sending z to the origin and K    b t the image of Kt under Ψ. Let
gbt : D r Kb t → D be the conformal map normalized to fix 0 and have positive
derivative at 0, and let W ct and O
                                  bt be the arguments of the images of Wt and
∞, respectively, under the map gbt ◦ Ψ ◦ gt−1. Then h̃t (z) is an affine function
of Wct − O  bt , and the time parameterization described above is the standard
radial Loewner evolution parameterization. By Loewner’s equation, ∂t O       bt is
                  c    b                          c    b                  c
a function of Wt − Ot . Therefore, the process Wt − Ot , together with W0 and

                                       20
b0 determines O
O              bt and thus also W
                                ct . This then determines Wt (see [SW05] for
more details about changing between radial and chordal coordinates).


3     Local sets
3.1    Absolute continuity
We begin this section with two simple results about singularity and absolute
continuity of the GFF.
Lemma 3.1. Suppose that D is a simply connected planar domain and that
h∂ is a deterministic non-identically-zero harmonic function on D and that
h is an instance of the (zero boundary) GFF on D. Then h and h∂ + h (both
of which are random distributions on D) have mutually singular laws.
Proof. We may assume without loss of generality that D is the disc of radius
1 centered at the origin (otherwise, we can conformally map D to this disc)
and that h∂ (0) 6= 0. For each ǫ > 0, let pǫ be a radially symmetric positive
function in Hs (D) which is supported in the annulus {z : 1−ǫ < |z| < 1} and
has integral one. If h is an instance of the GFF, then for each ǫ, the expected
value of the Gaussian random variable (h + h∂ , pǫ ) is (h∂ , pǫ ) = h∂ (0). It is
easy to see from (1.1) that the variance of this random variable tends to zero
as ǫ → 0. It follows from Borel-Cantelli that for any deterministic sequence of
ǫ which tend to zero quickly enough, we will have (h+ h∂ , pǫ ) → h∂ (0) almost
surely and (h, pǫ ) → 0 almost surely, and this implies the singularity.
    Say two coupled variables X and Y are almost independent if their
joint law is absolutely continuous with respect to the product of the marginal
laws. We now prove the following:
Lemma 3.2. Suppose that D is the unit disc and that S1 and S2 are con-
nected closed subsets of D such that
             dist(S1 , S2 ) := inf{d(x, y) : x ∈ S1 , y ∈ S2 } = ǫ > 0.
Then the projections of the GFF on D onto HarmDrS1 and HarmDrS2 are
almost independent.
    Informally, Lemma 3.2 says that the values of an instance h of the GFF
on (an infinitesimal neighborhood of) S1 are almost independent of the values
of h on (an infinitesimal neighborhood of) S2 .

                                        21
Proof. Since the distance between S1 and S2 is positive, there exists a path
γ in D which is either simple or a simple closed loop, such that the distance
δ from γ to S1 ∪ S2 is positive and γ separates S1 from S2 in D. Let D1 and
D2 be the connected components of D r γ containing S1 and S2 .
    Let hD̃ be an instance of the GFF in D̃ = ∪Dj , and let h∗D̃ be an in-
dependent instance of the projection of the GFF in D onto HarmD̃ , as in
Proposition 2.3. Then h = hD̃ + h∗D̃ is an instance of the GFF on D, by
Proposition 2.3. As discussed in Section 2.1, h∗D̃ restricted to D̃ is a ran-
dom harmonic (though not bounded) function on D̃, and hD̃ is a sum of
independent zero boundary GFFs on D1 and D2 .
    Next, we will construct continuous functions h1 , h2 ∈ H(D) such that
each hi is equal to h∗D̃ on a δ/3 neighborhood of Si but vanishes on the
component of D̃ not including Si . For i ∈ {1, 2}, the function hD̃ is Lipschitz
on Si . To see this, observe that since hD̃ is harmonic and zero on Si ∩ ∂D,
its gradient on D̃ extends continuously to all points on ∂D r γ. Thus it has
a maximum on each Si (since each Si is a positive distance from γ). We
can then let hi be the optimal Lipschitz extension to all of D of the function
which is defined to be hD̃ on the set of points in D of distance at most δ/3 to
Si and 0 on ∂ D̃ ∪ D3−i . Since hi is Lipschitz, it must, in particular, belong
to H(D).
    Now, if Pi denotes the projection onto the space HarmDr(Si ) , then we
have
            (P1 (h), P2 (h)) = (P1 (h1 ) + P1 (hD̃ ), P2 (h2 ) + P2 (hD̃ )).
However, Pi (hD̃ ), for i ∈ {1, 2} are, independent of one another.
    The reader may easily check that if h′ is any projection of the GFF onto
a closed subspace of H(D) and a is any fixed element of that subspace, then
the law of a + h′ is absolutely continuous with respect to that of h′ . In
this case G(h′ ) := (h′ , a)∇ /kak∇ is almost surely well defined (once we fix a
basis of H(D) comprised of members of Hs (D); recall Section 1.2) and is a
Gaussian with zero mean and unit variance. The Radon-Nikodym derivative
is then given by
                                                              
                  exp −kG(h′ )2 /2k / exp −(G(h′ ) + kak∇ )2 .

Absolute continuity similarly follows if a is random and independent of h′ .
Thus the law of

                     (P1 (h1 ) + P1 (hD̃ ), P2 (h2 ) + P2 (hD̃ )).

                                          22
is absolutely continuous with respect to the law of the (independent, as dis-
cussed above) pair
                             (P1 (hD̃ ), P2 (hD̃ )),
which is absolutely continuous with respect to the independent product of the
marginals of (P1 (h), P2 (h)) by the same argument applied to each component
separately.


3.2    Local sets for discrete fields
In this subsection only we will use the symbol h to denote an instance of
the discrete GFF instead of the continuum GFF. We will prove some basic
results that will have analogs when h is an instance of the continuum GFF.
If D is a T G-domain, then a random subset A of the set V of T G vertices in
D — coupled with an instance h of the discrete Gaussian free field on these
vertices with some boundary conditions — is called local if conditioned on
A and the restriction of h to A, the law of h is almost surely the discrete
GFF whose boundary conditions are the given values of h on A ∪ ∂D.
    We will now observe some simple facts about discrete local sets; we will
extend these facts in the next section to the continuum setting.
    Recall that for any deterministic subset B of vertices, the space of func-
tions supported on B is orthogonal (in the Dirichlet inner product) to the
space of functions that are harmonic at every vertex in B. Denote by B c the
set of vertices in D that do not lie in B.

Lemma 3.3. Let hB denote h restricted to a subset B of the vertices of D.
Let A be a random subset of the vertices of D, coupled with an instance h of
the discrete Gaussian free field on D with boundary conditions h∂ . Then the
following are equivalent:

  1. A is local.

  2. For each fixed subset B ⊂ V ∩ D, the following holds: conditioned on
     hBc (for almost all choices of hBc in any version of the conditional
     probability), the event A ∩ B = ∅ and the random variable hB are
     independent.

  3. For each fixed subset B ⊂ V ∩ D, the following holds: let S be the event
     that A intersects B, and let Ã be equal to A on the event S c and ∅


                                     23
     otherwise. Then conditioned on hBc , the pair (S, Ã) is independent of
     hB .
Proof. To show that (1) locality implies (3), it is enough to note that if we
condition on hBc and A, then (if A does not intersect B), the conditional
law of hB is its conditional law given just hBc . We will show this by first
sampling A, then the values of h on A, then hBc , then hB . By the locality
definition, the conditional law of h, given A and hA , is that of a DGFF whose
boundary conditions are the given values of h on A ∪ ∂D. Therefore, after
further conditioning on the event S and hBc , the conditional law of h will be
that of the DGFF with the given heights on A ∪ ∂D ∪ B c . In particular, once
hBc and S c are given, the conditional law of h does not depend on A. Since
this conditional law of h is the same as the conditional law given only hBc
(and no information about S or A), it follows that given hBc , the conditional
law of h is independent of (S, Ã).
    Next, (3) clearly implies (2). We will now assume (2) and derive (1).
To do this, we prove the statement “If P[A = C] 6= 0, then conditioned on
A = C and the heights on C ∪ ∂D, the law of h is the law of a DGFF given
those heights” by induction on the size of C. The statement is clearly true if
C is empty. For general C, we know from our assumption that conditioned
on hC and A ⊂ C, the law of h is the law of a DGFF with the given heights
on C. By the inductive hypothesis, we know that if we condition on hC and
any particular choice for A which is a proper subset of C, we will have this
same conditional law; considering separately the cases A = C and A a proper
subset of C, it follows that we also have this law if we condition on hC and
A = C, provided that P[A = C] 6= 0.
    The inductive technique used to derive (1) from (2) above is a fairly
general one. We will make reference to it later in the paper as well.
    We say that A is algorithmically local if there is a (possibly random)
algorithm for generating A from the values of h on vertices of D such that
almost surely every vertex whose height h(v) is used by the algorithm is
included in A. It is easy to see that algorithmically local sets are local:
Proposition 3.4. If a random set A coupled with the discrete GFF on the
vertices of D with boundary conditions h∂ is algorithmically local, then it is
also local.
   For a trivial example, A is algorithmically local whenever its law is in-
dependent of h—in particular, if A is deterministic. The set {v : h(v) < 0}

                                     24
is not local; however, the set of v that are in or adjacent to a boundary-
intersecting component of the subgraph of T G induced by {v : h(v) < 0} is
algorithmically local. Another algorithmically local set is the set of hexagons
on either side of the discrete interface in Figure 4.1.
    Given two distinct random sets A1 and A2 (each coupled with a discrete
GFF h), we can construct a three way coupling (h, A1 , A2 ) such that the
marginal law of (h, Ai ) (for i ∈ {1, 2}) is the given one, and conditioned on
h, the sets A1 and A2 are independent of one another. This can be done by
first sampling h and then sampling A1 and A2 independently from the regular
conditional probabilities. The union of A1 and A2 is then a new random set
coupled with h. We denote this new random set by A1 ∪    ˇ A2 and refer to it as
the conditionally independent union of A1 and A2 .
Lemma 3.5. Suppose that A and B and C are σ-algebras on which a proba-
bility measure is defined for which
  1. A is independent of B,

  2. A is independent of C, and

  3. given A, the σ-algebras B and C are independent of each other.
Then A is independent of the σ-algebra generated by both B and C.
Proof. Let A, B, C be events in A, B, C, respectively, then
                                       
  P A ∩ B ∩ C = E P B ∩ C ∩ A A = E P B ∩ C A 1A
                               
  = E P B A P C A 1A = E P[B] P[C] 1A = P[B] P[C] P[A] .

Lemma 3.6. If A1 and A2 are local sets coupled with h, then A := A1 ∪     ˇ A2
is also local. In fact, we have the slightly stronger statement that given the
pair (A1 , A2 ) and the values of h on A, the conditional law of h off of A is
that of a DGFF with the given boundary values.
Proof. Let S1 and S2 be the events that A1 and A2 hit B ⊂ D ∩ V ,
respectively. Let Ãi be equal to Ai on the event Sic and ∅ otherwise. For
almost all hBc we have (by Lemma 3.3) that conditioned on hBc
  1. (S1 , Ã1 ) is independent of hB ,

  2. (S2 , Ã2 ) is independent of hB , and

                                          25
  3. given hB , the events (S1 , Ã1 ) and (S2 , Ã2 ) are independent of each other.

(The last item follows from the definition of conditionally independent union.)
Then Lemma 3.5 implies that conditioned on hBc , the random variable hB
must be independent of (S1 , S2 , Ã1 , Ã2 ). In particular, this shows that hB
is independent of the union of the events S1 and S2 , which implies that the
conditionally independent union of A1 and A2 is local by Lemma 3.3. It also
shows the final claim in Lemma 3.6, namely that conditioned on A1 ∪A2 = C
and the values of h on C and on the pair (A1 , A2 ), the law of h is the law of
a DGFF given those values.
   The following is an immediate consequence of the definition of a local set.

Proposition 3.7. If A is a local set, then conditioned on A (in any regular
conditional probability) the expected value of h(v) is, as a function of v,
almost surely harmonic in the complement of A.

   Note that conditioned on A, the restriction of h to A is not deterministic;
thus we would not expect the expectation of h conditioned on A to be the
same as the expectation conditioned on A and the values of h in A (though
something like this will turn out to hold for our continuum level sets).
Remark 3.8. Although we will not use this fact here, we remark that Lemmas
3.3 and 3.6 are true in much greater generality. Suppose that h is any random
function from a finite set V to a measure space X, and that for each f : V →
X and each subset B of V we are given a probability measure Φ(f, B) on
functions from V to X, and for each B, the measure Φ(f, B) is a regular
conditional probability for h given its values on V r B. (In the case of the
DGFF on a graph G with vertex set V , this Φ(f, B) is simply the DGFF
with boundary conditions given by the values of f on V r B and the original
boundary vertices.) We can then define a random set A coupled with h to be
local if Φ(h, A) is a regular version of the conditional probability of h given
A and the values of h on A. The proofs of Lemmas 3.6 and 3.3 apply in this
generality without modification.

3.3    Local sets for the GFF
Let Γ be the space of all closed (with respect to the d∗ metric) nonempty
subsets of H ∪ {∞}. We will always view Γ as a metric space, endowed


                                        26
with the Hausdorff metric induced by d∗ , i.e., the distance between sets
S1 , S2 ∈ Γ is
                                     n                                o
              dHAUS (S1 , S2 ) := max sup d∗ (x, S2 ), sup d∗ (y, S1 ) .
                                    x∈S1          y∈S2

Note that Γ is naturally equipped with the Borel σ-algebra on Γ induced by
this metric. It is well known (and the reader may easily verify) that Γ is a
compact metric space. Note that the elements of Γ are themselves compact
in the d∗ metric.
    Given A ⊂ Γ, let Aδ denote the closed set containing all points in H
whose d∗ distance from A is at most δ. Let Aδ be the smallest σ algebra
in which A and the restriction
                           T    of h (as a distribution) to the interior of Aδ
are measurable. Let A = δ∈Q,δ>0 Aδ . Intuitively, this is the smallest σ-field
in which A and the values of h in an infinitesimal neighborhood of A are
measurable.
Lemma 3.9. Let D be a simply connected planar domain, suppose that (h, A)
is a random variable which is a coupling of an instance h of the GFF with a
random element A of Γ. Then the following are equivalent:
  1. For each deterministic open B ⊂ D, we have that given the projection of
     h onto HarmB , the event A∩B = ∅ is independent of the projection of h
     onto SuppB . In other words, the conditional probability that A ∩ B = ∅
     given h is a measurable function of the projection of h onto HarmB .
  2. For each deterministic open B ⊂ D, we have that given the projection of
     h onto HarmB , the pair (S, Ã) (defined as in Lemma 3.3) is independent
     of the projection of h onto SuppB .
  3. Conditioned on A, (a regular version of ) the conditional law of h is
     that of h1 + h2 where h2 is the GFF with zero boundary values on
     D r A (extended to all of D via Proposition 2.2) and h1 is an A-
     measurable random distribution (i.e., as a distribution-valued function
     on the space of distribution-set pairs (h, A), h1 is A-measurable) which
     is a.s. harmonic on D r A.
  4. A sample with the law of (h, A) can be produced as follows. First choose
     the pair (h1 , A) according to some law where h1 is almost surely har-
     monic on D r A. Then sample an instance h2 of the GFF on D r A
     and set h = h1 + h2 .

                                     27
    Following the discrete definitions, we say a random closed set A coupled
with an instance h of the GFF, is local if one of the equivalent items in
Lemma 3.9 holds. For any coupling of A and h, we use the notation CA to
describe the conditional expectation of the distribution h given A. When A
is local, CA is the h1 described in item (3) above.
Proof. Trivially, (2) implies (1). Next, suppose A satisfies (1). We may
assume that D is bounded (applying a conformal map if necessary to make
this the case). Fix δ and let A bδ denote the intersection of D with the union
of all closed squares of the grid δZ2 that intersect Aδ . Then we claim that
Abδ satisfies (1) as well for each deterministic choice of δ. This can be seen
by replacing B with B ′ := D r (D r B)δ , and noting that A intersects B ′
if and only if Aδ intersects B ′ . Since B ′ ⊂ B, conditioning on HarmB′ is
equivalent to conditioning on HarmB and then conditioning on a function of
SuppB (and SuppB′ is also a function of SuppB ), which proves the claim.
    There are only finitely many possible choices for A  bδ , so the fact that A
                                                                               bδ
satisfies (3) follows by the inductive argument used in the proof of Lemma
3.3.
    To be precise, we prove the statement “If P[A     bδ = C] 6= 0, then con-
ditioned on A  bδ = C and the projection h1 of h onto the space of functions
harmonic off of C, the law of h is the law of a zero-boundary DGFF on D rC
plus h1 ” by induction on the size of C. The statement is clearly true if C
is empty. For general C, we know from our assumption that conditioned on
hC and A ⊂ C, the law of h is the law of a DGFF with the given heights
on C. By the inductive hypothesis, we know that if we condition on hC and
any particular choice for A which is a proper subset of C, we will have this
same conditional law; it follows that we also have this law if we condition on
hC and A = C, provided that P[A = C] 6= 0.
    Since A is the intersection of the Abδ (defined analogously to Aδ ), for
δ > 0, the reverse martingale convergence theorem implies the almost sure
convergence CAbδ → CA as δ → 0 in the weak sense, i.e., for each fixed p, we
have a.s.
                               (CAbδ , p) → (CA , p).

This and the fact that (3) holds for every Abδ implies that it must hold for A
as well. Since this holds for every fixed p, we may extend to all p ∈ Hs (D)
and obtain (3) by Proposition 1.1 and Proposition 2.2.
   Now (4) is immediate from (3) when we set h1 = CA . To obtain (2) from


                                       28
(4), if suffices to show that given the projection of h onto HarmB and the
pair (S, Ã), the conditional law of the projection of h onto SuppB is the same
as its a priori law (or its law conditioned on only the projection of h onto
HarmB ), namely the law of the zero boundary GFF on B. To see this, we
may first sample A and h1 and then—conditioned on A ∩ B = ∅—sample
the projection of h − h1 onto SuppB . Since the law of h − h1 is the GFF on
D r A by assumption, this projection is the GFF on B, as desired.

Lemma 3.10. Lemma 3.6 applies in the continuum setting as well. That
is, if A1 and A2 are local sets coupled with the GFF h on D, then their
conditionally independent union A = A1 ∪     ˇ A2 is also local. The analog of the
slightly stronger statement in Lemma 3.6 also holds: given A and the pair
(A1 , A2 ), the conditional law of h is given by CA plus an instance of the GFF
on D r A.

Proof. The proof is essentially identical to the discrete case. We use charac-
terization (2) for locality as given in Lemma 3.9 and observe that Lemma 3.5
implies the analogous result holds for the quadruple (S1 , Ã1 , S2 , Ã2 )—namely,
that for each deterministic open B ⊂ D, we have that given the projection of
h onto HarmB and the quadruple (S1 , Ã1 , S2 , Ã2 ), the conditional law of the
projection of h onto SuppB (assuming A ∩ B = ∅) is the law of the GFF on
B. The proof that this analog of (2) implies the corresponding analog of (3)
in the statement of Lemma 3.10 is also essentially as the discrete case.

Lemma 3.11. Let A1 and A2 be connected local sets. Then CA1 ∪ˇ A2 − CA2 is
almost surely a harmonic function in D r (A1 ∪ ˇ A2 ) that tends to zero on all
                               ˇ A2 ) that tend to a limit in A2 r A1 (unless
sequences of points in D r (A1 ∪
A2 is a single point).

Proof. By Lemma 3.10, the union A1 ˇ      ∪A2 is itself a local set, so CA1 ∪ˇ A2
is well defined. Now, conditioned on A1 the law of the field in D r A1 is
given by a GFF in D r A1 plus CA1 . We next claim that A2 r A1 is a local
subset of D r A1 , with respect to this GFF on D r A1 . To see this, note
that characterization (1) for locality from Lemma 3.9 follows from the latter
statement in Lemma 3.10.
    By replacing D with D r A1 and subtracting CA1 , we may thus reduce to
the case that A1 is deterministically empty and CA1 = 0. What remains to
show is that if A is any local set on D then CA (when viewed as a harmonic


                                        29
function on D r A) tends to zero almost surely along all sequences of points
in D r A that approach a point x that lies on a connected components of
∂D r A that consists of more than a single point.
    If we fix a neighborhood B1 of x and another neighborhood B2 whose
distance from B1 is positive, then the fact that the statement holds on the
event A ⊂ B2 is immediately from Lemma 3.1 and Lemma 3.2. Since this
holds for arbitrary B1 and B2 , the result follows.
   To conclude, we note the following is immediate from the definition of
local and Theorem 1.3.

Lemma 3.12. In the coupling between h and γ of Theorem 1.3, the set
γ([0, T ]) is local for every T ≥ 0. The same is true if T is a non-deterministic
stopping time of the process Wt .


4     Fine grid preliminaries
4.1    Subspaces are asymptotically dense
As rD → ∞, the subspaces {g ◦ φ−1    D : g ∈ HT G (D)}, where φD and rD
are as defined in Section 1.3, become asymptotically dense in H(H) in the
following sense. When D is a T G-domain and g ∈ Hs (D), let PD (g) denote
the orthogonal projection of g (with respect to the inner product (·, ·)∇ ) onto
the space of continuous functions which are affine on each triangle of T G.
For f ∈ H(H) set fD := f ◦ φD .

Lemma 4.1. Let D ⊂ C denote a T G-domain, and assume the notation
above. For each f ∈ H(H), the values PD (fD )◦φ−1D −f ∇ = kPD (fD )−fD k∇
tend to zero as rD → ∞. In fact, if f ∈ Hs (H), then kPD (fD ) − fD k∇ =
O( r1D ), where the implied constant may depend on f .

Proof. Since Hs (H) is dense in H(H), the former statement follows from the
latter. Suppose that f ∈ Hs (H). Then it is supported on a compact subset
K of H.
    When z ranges over values in K and φ ranges over all conformal functions
that map a subdomain of C onto H, standard distortion theorems for con-
formal functions (e.g., Proposition 1.2 and Corollary 1.4 of [Pom92]) imply
the following (where the implied constants may depend on K):


                                       30
  1. The ratio of |(φ−1 )′ (i)| and rD := radφ−1 (i) (φ−1 H) is bounded between
     two positive constants.

  2. |(φ−1)′ (z)| = O(|(φ−1)′ (i)|) = O(rD ).

  3. diam(φ−1 (K)) = O(|(φ−1)′ (i)|) = O(rD ).

  4. |φ′(φ−1 (z))| = O( r1D ).
                                             
  5. |φ′′ (φ−1(z))| = O (φ−11)′ (z)2 = O rD −2 .

    Now kPD (fD ) − fD k∇ = inf{kg − fD k∇ : g ∈ HT G (D)}. We will bound
the latter by considering the case that g is the function gD ∈ HT G (D) that
agrees with fD on T G — and then applying the above bounds with φ = φD .
    Since the triangles of T G contained in D have side length one, the value
|∇gD − ∇fD | on a triangle is bounded by a constant times the maximal norm
of the second derivative matrix of fD = f ◦ φD in that triangle (where the
latter is viewed as a function from R2 to R). If f and φD were both functions
from R to R, then the chain rule would give

  (f ◦ φD )′′ (z) = [f ′ (φD (z))φ′D (z)]′ = f ′′ (φD (z))φ′D (z)2 + f ′ (φD (z))φ′′D (z).

In our case, when we view f as a function from R2 to R and φ′D as a function
from R2 to R2 , the chain rule yields the formulas: but now f ′ at a point is
understood to be a linear map from R2 to R, and φ′D at a point is understood
to be a linear map from R2 to R2 , etc.
    Since all components of f ′ and f ′′ are bounded on K, the distortion
bounds above give
                                                                     
              |(f ◦ φD )′′ (z)| = O(|φ′D (z)2 + φ′′D (z)|) = O rD −2

and hence                                           
                            k∇gD − ∇fD k2∞ = O rD −4 .
The area of the support of f ◦ φD is O([diam φ−1     2        2
                                               D (K)] ) = O(rD ). Thus
kgD − f ◦ φD k2∇ = O(rD 2 /rD 4 ) = O(rD −2 ).




                                            31
4.2    Topological and measure theoretic preliminaries
In this section we assemble several simple topological facts that will play
a role in the proof of Theorem 1.2. Up to this point, we have treated the
space Ω = ΩD of distributions on a planar domain D as a measure space,
using F to represent the smallest σ-algebra that makes (·, p) measurable for
each fixed p ∈ Hs (D). We have not yet explicitly introduced a metric on Ω.
(When we discussed convergence of distributions, we implicitly used the weak
topology—i.e., the topology in which hi → h if and only if (hi , p) → (h, p)
for all p ∈ Hs (D).) Although it does not play a role in our main theorem
statements, the following lemma will be useful in the proofs. Recall that a
topological space is called σ-compact if it is the union of countably many
compact sets:

Lemma 4.2. Let D be a simply connected domain. There exists a metric db
              b ⊂ Ω with Ω
on a subspace Ω          b ∈ F such that

                                         b almost surely.
  1. An instance of the GFF on D lies in Ω

  2. The topology induced by db on Ω
                                   b is σ-compact.

                            b induced by db is the set of subsets of Ω
  3. The Borel σ-algebra on Ω                                        b that
     lie in F .

Proof. It is enough to prove Lemma 4.2 for a single bounded simply con-
nected domain D (say the unit disc), since pulling back the metric D     b via
a conformal map preserves the properties claimed in the Lemma. When fi
is an eigenvalue of the Laplacian with negative eigenvalue λ, then we may
define (−∆)a fi = (−λ)a fi , and we may extend this definition linearly to the
linear span of the fi . Denote by (−∆)a L2 (D) the Hilbert space closure of the
linear span of the eigenfunctions of the Laplacian on D (that vanish on ∂D)
under the inner product (f, g)a := ((−∆)−a f, (−∆)−a g). In other words,
(−∆)a L2 (D) consists of those f for which (−∆)−a f ∈ L2 (D). It follows
immediately from Weyl’s formula for bounded domains that (−∆)a L2 (D) ⊂
(−∆)b L2 (D) when a < b, that each of these spaces is naturally a subset
of Ω, and that when a > 0, an instance of the GFF almost surely lies in
(−∆)a L2 (D). (See [She03] for details.) We can thus take Ω  b = (−∆)a L2 (D)
for some a > 0 and let db be the Hilbert space metric corresponding to
(−∆)b L2 (D) for some b > a.


                                      32
    To see that the topology induced by db on Ω   b is σ-compact follows from
the fact that with its usual Hilbert space metric, (−∆)a L2 (D) is separable
(in particular can covered with countably many translates of the unit ball),
and that such a unit ball is compact w.r.t. d.b
    We next argue that the Borel σ-algebra Fb on Ω   b induced by db is the set
              b that lie in F . Recall that F is the smallest σ-algebra that
of subsets of Ω
makes (h, p) measurable for each p ∈ Hs (D). Clearly a unit ball of db is in
this σ-algebra (since it Hs (D) is dense in such a unit ball), which shows that
Fb ⊂ F . For the other direction, it suffices to observe that each generating
subset of F of the form {(·, p) ≤ c}, with c ∈ R and p ∈ Hs (D) has an
intersection with Ωb that belongs to Fb.
   We now cite the following basic fact (see [Vai, Thm. 72,73] or [Dud02,
Ch. 7]):
Lemma 4.3. Every σ-compact metric space is separable. If µ is a Borel
probability measure on a σ-compact metric space then µ is regular, i.e., for
each Borel measurable set S, we have
                        µ(S) = inf µ(S ′) = sup µ(S ′′ ),
where S ′ ranges over open supersets of S and S ′′ ranges over compact subsets
of S.
    A family of probability measures µ on a separable topological space X
is said to be tight if for every ǫ > 0 there is a compact X ′ ⊂ X such that
µ(X ′) > 1 − ǫ for every µ in the family. Prokhorov’s theorem states that
(assuming X is separable) every tight family of probability measures on X
is weakly pre-compact. If X is a separable metric space, then the converse
holds, i.e., every weakly pre-compact family of probability measures is also
tight.
Lemma 4.4. If Θ1 and Θ2 are two weakly pre-compact families of probability
measures on complete separable metric spaces Z1 and Z2 , then the space of
couplings between measures in the two families is weakly pre-compact.
Proof. By the converse to Prokhorov’s theorem, Θ1 and Θ2 are both tight.
This implies that the space of couplings between elements of Θ1 and Θ2 is also
tight, which in turn implies pre-compactness (by Prokhorov’s theorem).
    The following is another simple topological observation that will be useful
later on:

                                       33
Lemma 4.5. Suppose that Z1 and Z2 are complete separable metric spaces,
µ is a Borel probability measure on Z1 and ψ1 , ψ2 , . . . is a sequence of mea-
surable functions from Z1 to Z2 . Suppose further that when z is a random
variable distributed according to µ, the law of (z, ψi (z)) converges weakly to
that of (z, ψ(z)) as i → ∞, where ψ : Z1 → Z2 is Borel measurable. Then
the functions ψi , viewed as random variables on the probability space Z1 ,
converge to ψ in probability.
Proof. By tightness of the set of measures in the sequence (recall Lemma
4.4), for each ǫ > 0, we can find a compact K ⊂ Z2 such that µ(ψ −1(K)) >
1 − ǫ. Let B1 , . . . , Bk be a finite partition of K into disjoint measurable sets
of diameter at most ǫ and write Cj = ψ −1 Bj for each j. Then Lemma 4.3
implies thatP there exist open subsets C1′ , · · · Ck′ of Z1 such that Cj′ ⊃ Cj for
each j and j µ(Cj′ r Cj ) ≤ ǫ. For each j, let Bj′ be the set of points of
distance at most ǫ from Bj . Let µ̃i denote the law of (z, ψi (z)) and µ̃ the
                                  S                         S
law of (z, ψ(z)). Set A′ := kj=1 Cj′ × Bj′ and A := kj=1 Cj × Bj′ . Then a
standard consequence of weak convergence (Portmanteau’s theorem [Dud02,
Theorem 11.1.1]) implies lim inf i→∞ µ̃i (A′ ) ≥ µ̃(A′ ). But
                                          k
                                          X
                      µ̃(A′ ) ≥ µ̃(A) =         µ(Cj ) > 1 − ǫ .
                                          j=1

                                            Pk
Hence lim inf i→∞ µ̃i (A′ ) > 1 − ǫ. Since            ′
                                               j=1 µ(Cj r Cj ) ≤ ǫ, we have
lim inf i→∞ µ̃i (A) ≥ 1 − 2ǫ. But when (z, ψi (z)) ∈ A, the distance between
ψi (z) and ψ(z) is at most 2 ǫ. Hence,

               lim inf µ{x ∈ Z1 : d(ψi (x), ψ(x)) ≤ 2ǫ} ≥ 1 − 2ǫ.
                i→∞

Since this holds for any ǫ > 0, the result follows.


4.3    Limits of discrete local sets are local
Lemma 4.6. Let Dn be a sequence of T G-domains with maps φn : Dn → H
such that rDn → ∞ as n → ∞. Let an instance h of the GFF on H be
coupled with the discrete GFF on each Dn , as in Section 1.3. Let An be a
sequence of discrete local subsets of Dn ∩ T G. Then there is a subsequence
along which the law of (h, φn An ) converges weakly (in the space of measures
   b × Γ) to a limiting coupling (h, A) with respect to the sum of the metric
on Ω

                                          34
db on the first component and dHAUS on the second component. In any such
limit, A is local.

Proof. Lemmas 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4 imply the existence of the subsequential
limit (h, A), so it remains only to show that in any such limit A is local.
We will prove that characterization (2) for locality as given in Lemma 3.9
holds. For this, it suffices to show that for every deterministic open B ⊂ H
and function φ ∈ −∆Hs (B) (supported in a compact subset of B) the law of
(h, φ) is independent of the pair (S, Ã) (as defined in Lemma 3.9) together
with the projection of h onto HarmB . Here we are using the fact that for
Gaussian fields the marginals characterize the field; see Lemma 2.1. It is
clearly enough to consider the case that B has compact closure in H.
    Fix g ∈ Hs (B) and set φ = −∆g. Let Sn denote the space {f ◦ φ−1        Dn : f ∈
HT G (Dn )}. By Lemma 4.1, we can approximate g by elements gn in Sn in
such a way that kgn − gk∇ → 0 as n → ∞. Let B ′ be the set of points in B
of distance at least ǫ from ∂B, where ǫ is small enough so that g is compactly
supported in B ′ . In fact, the construction given in the proof of Lemma 4.1
ensures that each gn will be supported in B ′ for all n sufficiently large.
    Now, for each fixed n, let h1n denote the projection of h onto the space of
functions in Sn that vanish outside of B ′ . Let h2n and h3n be such that h1n + h2n
is the projection of h onto Sn and h1n + h2n + h3n = h. Clearly, h1n , h2n , and
h3n are mutually independent, since they are projections of h onto orthogonal
spaces.
    Following characterization 3 of Lemma 3.3, let Sn be the event that An
includes a vertex of a triangle whose image under φn intersects B ′ , and let Ãn
be equal to An on the event Snc and ∅ otherwise. By Lemma 3.3, conditioned
on h2n , the pair (Sn , Ãn ) is independent of h1n . In fact, (since h3n is a priori
independent of the triple (An , h1n , h2n )), the pair (Sn , Ãn ) is independent of
h1n + h3n .
    When n is large enough, the space HarmB is orthogonal to Sn . Thus, for
each sufficiently large n, (h, gn )∇ is independent of the projection hBc of h
onto HarmB and the pair (Sn , Ãn ).
    Now, since kgn − gk∇ → 0 as n → ∞, the random variables (gn − g, h)∇
tend to zero in law as n → ∞. Since weak limits of independent random vari-
ables are independent, we conclude that in any weak limit (h, Slim , Ãlim , A) of
the quadruple (h, Sn , φn Ãn , φn An ) (again, subsequential limits exist by Lem-
mas 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4), the value (h, g)∇ is independent of hBc and (Slim , Ãlim ).
The event Slim contains the event S (since any Hausdorff limit of sets that

                                         35
Figure 4.1: Gaussian free field on faces of hexagonal lattice—faces shaded
by height—with boundary conditions equal to −λ on the left boundary arc
and λ on the right boundary arc, where λ > 0 is a constant. Thick line
indicates chordal interface between positive and negative height hexagons.
In the figure, λ is taken to be the special constant for which, as the mesh
size is taken to zero, the law of the interface converges to that of SLE(4).

intersect B ′ must intersect B), and thus the pair (Slim , Ãlim ) determines the
pair (S, A). This implies that (h, g)∇ is independent of hBc and (S, Ã). Since
this is true for all B and g supported on B, we conclude that A is local.


4.4    Statement of the height gap lemma
We now state the special case of the height gap lemma (as proved in [SS09])
that is relevant to the current work. (The lemma in [SS09] applies to more
general boundary conditions.)
   As usual, we let D be a T G domain with boundary conditions −λ on
one arc ∂− and λ on a complementary arc ∂+ , and let x∂ and y∂ denote
respectively the clockwise and counterclockwise endpoints of ∂+ .


                                       36
    Let γ T be the path in the dual lattice of T G from x∂ to y∂ that has
adjacent to its right hand side vertices in ∂+ or vertices where h > 0 and has
adjacent to its left hand side vertices in ∂− or vertices where h < 0, stopped
at some stopping time T for the discrete exploration process. This is the path
that traces the boundary between hexagons with positive sign and hexagons
with negative sign in the dual lattice, as described in [SS09] and illustrated
in Figure 4.1. Let v0 be some vertex of T G in D.
    Let V− denote the vertices on the left side of γ T together with the vertices
in ∂− and V+ the vertices on the right side or in ∂+ . Let FT denote the
function that is +λ on V+ (γ T ), −λ on V− (γ T ) and discrete-harmonic at all
other vertices in D. Let hT be the discrete harmonic interpolation of the
values of h on V− (γ T ) ∪ V+ (γ T ) and on all T G-vertices in ∂D.
Lemma 4.7. For some fixed value of λ > 0, we have
                             hT (v0 ) − FT (v0 ) → 0
in probability as T , D and v0 are taken so that dist(v0 , ∂D) → ∞. Similarly,
if v0 is a random vertex (with law independent of h) supported on the set of
points of distance at least r from ∂D, then as r → ∞
                                                     
                            E hT (v0 ) − FT (v0 ) γ T
(viewed as a random variable depending on γ T — the expectation is respect
to both v0 and hT ) tends to zero in probability.


5     Proofs of main results
Proof of Theorem 1.3. In Section 2.2 (Lemma 2.7), we explicitly pro-
duced a coupling of W (the Loewner driving parameter of an SLE(4)) and h
(the GFF on H with ±λ boundary conditions) with the conformal Markov
property described in Theorem 1.3. Lemma 2.8 implies that any (h̃, W̃ ) that
satisfies the hypotheses p
                         of Theorem 1.3 must have this same law—and that
the value of λ is indeed π/8.
    All that remains to prove in Theorem 1.3 is items 3 and 4. To prove 3
we must show that W is equivalent (up to redefinition on a set of measure
zero) to an F -measurable function from Ω to Λ. In other words, we must
show that given h, the conditional law of W (in any regular version of the
conditional probability) is almost surely supported on a single element of Λ.

                                       37
   Let h be an instance of the GFF (with boundary conditions −λ on
(−∞, 0) and λ on (0, ∞)). Write Φ(z) = −z −1 . Then Φ is a conformal
automorphism of H sending 0 to ∞ and ∞ to zero, and −h ◦ Φ has the same
law as h (where −h ◦ Φ is the pullback of h as defined in Section 1.2). Let
W and V be random elements of Λ coupled with h in such a way that

   1. The pair (h, W ) satisfies the hypotheses of Theorem 1.3.

   2. The pair (−h ◦ Φ, V ) satisfies the hypotheses of Theorem 1.3.

   3. Given h, V and W are independent of one another.

     Let γ 1 be the path with Loewner evolution given by W and let γ 2 be the
image of the Loewner evolution generated by V under Φ. Then the law of γ 1
is that of an SLE(4) from 0 to ∞ and that the law of γ 2 is that of an SLE(4)
from ∞ to 0.
     For any fixed time T , conditioned on γ 2 ([0, T ]), the law of h is that of a
GFF on H r γ 2 ([0, T ]) with boundary conditions of −λ on the left side of
γ 2 ([0, T ]) and (−∞, 0) and λ on the right side of γ 2 ([0, T ]) and (0, ∞). In
particular (recall Lemma 3.12) γ 2 ([0, T ]) is local, and the same holds if T is
a stopping time of γ 2 ([0, T ]).
     If we fix a stopping time T1 for γ 1 , then γ 1 ([0, T1 ]) is also local. On the
event that γ 1 ([0, T1 ]) and γ 2 ([0, T ]) do not intersect each other, Lemma 3.11
yields that the conditional law of h given both sets is that of a GFF on
the complement of these sets, with the expected ±λ boundary conditions.
Since the same holds for any T1 , Lemma 2.8 and Lemma 3.11 imply that
conditioned on γ 2 ([0, T ]), the law of γ 1 — up until the first time it hits
γ 2 ([0, T ]), is that of an SLE(4) in H r γ 2 ([0, T ]), started at 0 and targeted
at γ 2 (T ).
     It follows that almost surely γ 1 hits γ 2 ([0, T ]) for the first time at γ 2 (T ).
Since this applies to any choice of T , we conclude that γ 1 hits a dense count-
able set of points along γ 2 , and (by symmetry) γ 2 hits a dense countable
set of points along γ 1 , and hence the two paths (both of which are almost
surely continuous simple paths, by the corresponding almost sure properties
of SLE(4)) are equal almost surely. This implies that conditioned on V and
h, the law of W is almost surely supported on a single element of Λ. Since
V and W are conditionally independent given h, it follows that conditioned
on h, the law of W is almost surely supported on a single element of Λ. The
proof of item 4 will be established during the proof of Theorem 1.2 below.

                                           38
    In what follows, we use the notation introduced in Section 1.3 and the
statement of Theorem 1.2. We will first give a proof of Theorem 1.2 that
assumes the main result of [SS09], namely that the discrete interfaces con-
verge in law to SLE(4) with respect to the metric dSTRONG . Afterwards, we
will show how this convergence in law can be derived from Lemma 4.7 (the
height gap lemma) and Theorem 1.2. That is, we give an alternate way of
deriving the main result of [SS09] (in the case of ±λ boundary conditions)
from Theorem 1.2, so that the only result from [SS09] that we really need for
this paper is Lemma 4.7. (The proof of Lemma 4.7 admittedly takes about
2/3 of the body of [SS09], excluding the introduction, preliminaries, etc.)
Proof of Theorem 1.2. Let φn : Dn → H be a sequence of conformal
homeomorphisms from T G-domains Dn to H such that limn→∞ rDn = ∞.
    bn = γ
Let γ     bDn denote the image in H of the interface of the coupled discrete
GFF in Dn . For each fixed t, by Lemma 4.4, there is a subsequence of the
Dn along which the pair (b   γ n ([0, t]), h) converges in law (with respect to the
sum of the Hausdorff metric on the first component and the db metric on
the second component) to the law of a random pair (γ([0, t]), h), where the
marginal law of γ (by the main result of [SS09]) must be SLE(4).
   By Theorem 1.3 and Lemma 4.5, it will be enough to show that any such
limiting pair (γ, h) satisfies the hypotheses of Theorem 1.3. For each fixed t,
by Lemma 4.6, γ([0, t]) is a local set in this limiting coupling. We next claim
that Cγ([0,t]) is almost surely given by
                                                           
                        ht := λ 1 − 2π −1 arg(gt − Wt ) ,

where gt is the Loewner evolution, driven by Wt , that corresponds to γ.
Note that since ht is a bounded function that is defined almost everywhere
in H, it Rmay be also viewed as a distribution on H in the obvious way:
(ht , p) = ht (z)p(z)dz.
     Once this claim is proved, Theorem 1.2 is immediate from Theorem 1.3,
since the claim implies that the limiting law of (h, W ) satisfies the hypotheses
of Theorem 1.3 and thus W is almost surely the Λ-valued function of h
described in Theorem 1.3—and the fact that this convergence holds for any
subsequence of the Dn implies that it must hold for the entire sequence.
     Let An denote the set of vertices incident to the left or right of the preim-
age of the path γbn ([0, t]) in Dn (so that each An is a discrete algorithmically
local set, representing the set of vertices whose values are observed up to the


                                        39
first point in the exploration algorithm that the capacity of the image of the
level line in H reaches t).
    Let Cnt denote the conditional expectation of h given the values of hDn
on vertices in An , viewed as a distribution—more precisely, (Cnt , p) = (b
                                                                          hDn ◦
  −1             b
φn , p), where hDn is the (piecewise affine interpolation of) the discrete har-
monic interpolation to Dn of the values of hDn on the vertices of An and
on the boundary vertices. Let Wtn be the Loewner driving parameter for
bn ([0, t]). Fix t ≥ 0 and consider now the triple:
γ

                              (Wtn , Cnt , γ
                                           bn ([0, t])).

By Lemma 4.4, this converges along a subsequence in law (with respect to the
dSTRONG metric on first coordinate plus the db metric on the second coordinate
plus the Hausdorff d∗ metric on the third coordinate) to a limit (Wt , Ct , Kt ).
We may define the Loewner evolution gtn in terms of Wtn and analogously
define                                                 
                     hnt := λ 1 − 2π −1 arg(gtn − Wtn ) .
For each p ∈ Hs (H), we claim that the random quantity

                                (hnt , p) − (Cnt , p)

is a continuous function of the triplet above, which implies that the differ-
ence between this quantity and (ht , p) − (Ct , p) converges in probability to
zero. The continuity of the latter term holds simply since p is smooth and
compactly supported (and thus the ∆a p lies in L2 for all a), while the former
piece is continuous with respect to the dSTRONG metric on γ. Following the
proof of Lemma 4.6, it is not hard to see that Ct = CKt , since on the discrete
level, once one conditions on hnt and Cnt the conditional law of the field minus
Cnt is that of a zero boundary DGFF on the set of unobserved vertices.
    A harmonic function is determined by its values in an open set, since
a harmonic function is the real part of a (possibly multi-valued) analytic
function, so it is now enough to show that for each such p, the difference
between the conditional expectation of (h, p) — given An and the value of
hDn on An — and the value (hnt , p) converges in probability to zero as n → ∞
(along a subsequence for which a weak limit exists).
    The expected value of (h, p) given the values on An is given by (Cnt , p),
which is in turn a weighted average of the values of b  hDn on vertices of Dn
which lie on triangles that intersect the image under φn of the support of

                                         40
p. It follows from Lemma 4.7 that if p is such that the distance between
these vertices and An necessarily tends to ∞ as n → ∞ (which is the case
if p is compactly supported in the complement of the set of points that can
be reached by a Loewner evolution up to time t), then any subsequential
weak limit of the law of the triplet above is the same as it would be if b  hDn
were replaced by the discrete harmonic function which is −λ on the left-
side vertices of An and λ on the right side. By standard estimates relating
discrete and continuous harmonic measure (it is enough here to recall that
discrete random walk scales to Brownian motion), we therefore have (hnt , p)−
(Cnt , p) → 0 in law as n → ∞ and thus (ht , p) − (CKt , p) = 0 almost surely.
Since this is true for any p which is necessarily supported off of Kt , we have
ht = CKt on H r Kt almost surely as desired.

                                                                          bn
   We now give an alternate proof of the fact, proved in [SS09], that the γ
converge in law to SLE(4). Using the notation introduced in the previous
proof, write
                   Tǫn (p) = inf{t : (hnt , p) − (Cnt , p) > ǫ}.
                   Uǫn (p) = inf{t : (hnt , p) − (Cnt , p) < −ǫ}.
Consider a subsequential limit along which the quadruple

                                             bn ([0, t])),
                             (t, Wtn , Cnt , γ

defined with t = Tǫn (p), converges in law to a limit

                               (T, WT , CKT , KT ).

We claim that in such a limit, for any fixed neighborhood of the support of
p, T is almost surely large enough so that KT intersects that neighborhood.
The arguments in the previous proof would imply that—on the event that
KT does does not intersect such a neighborhood—we have

                             (hT , p) − (CKT , p) = 0

almost surely. However, since (hnt , p) −(Cnt , p) > ǫ on the analogous event for
each n—and the values (hnt , p) − (Cnt , p) converge to (hT , p) − (CKT , p)—we
must have
                           (hT , p) − (CKT , p) > ǫ


                                         41
almost surely on this event, which implies that the event has probability zero.
A similar argument holds with U in place of T .
    The law of (Cnt , p), up until the first time that γ
                                                       bn ([0, t]) intersects a fixed
neighborhood of the support of p, is a martingale whose largest increment size
tends to zero in n. Thus, if we parameterized time by quadratic variation,
then the limiting process (CKT , p) would be a Brownian motion up until the
first time that KT intersects the support of p, and (hnt , p) − (Cnt , p) would
converge in law to this limiting process with respect to the supremum norm
on finite time intervals.
    The height gap lemma implies that (hT , p) = (CKT , p) for any fixed stop-
ping time (as discussed in the previous proof). We know that (CKT , p) is a
Brownian motion when parameterized by −Et (p), as defined in Section 2.2, so
the same must be true for (hT , p), and the arguments
                                                   √       in the proof of Lemma
2.8 then imply that the law of W is that of 4 times a Brownian motion         p
(so that the Loewner evolution generated by W is SLE(4)) and λ = π/8.
Since the (hnt , p) converge uniformly to (ht , p), the same arguments imply
that the W n converge in law to W with respect to the supremum norm on
compact intervals of time.
    The fact that this driving parameter convergence holds for both forward
and reverse parameterizations of the path implies that the convergence also
holds in dSTRONG by the main result of [SS].


6     Remark on other contour lines
A more general problem than the one dealt with in this paper is to try
to identify the collection of all chordal contour lines and contour loops of
an instance of the GFF with arbitrary boundary conditions—and to show
that they are limits of the chordal contour lines and contour loops of the
piecewise linear approximations of the field. The second author is currently
collaborating with Jason Miller on some aspects of this general problem.
    For now, we only briefly mention one reason to expect Theorems 1.2 and
1.3 to also provide information about the general problem. Let h be a GFF
with boundary conditions h∂ as in Theorem 1.2. When ψ ∈ Hs (D), it is not
hard to see that the law of h is absolutely continuous with respect to the law
of h + ψ.
Corollary 6.1. In the context of Theorem 1.2, if ψ ∈ Hs (H) and h is replaced
by h + ψ, then as rD → ∞, the random paths γbD = φD ◦ γD , viewed as ΛC -

                                         42
valued random variables on (Ω, F ), converge in probability (with respect to
the metric dSTRONG on ΛC ) to an (Ω, F )-measurable random path γ ψ ∈ ΛC
whose law is absolutely continuous with respect to the law of SLE(4).

    We may interpret γ ψ as the zero contour line of h + ψ. Note that if ψ
is equal to a constant −C on an open set, then the intersection of γ ψ with
this set can be viewed as (a collection of arcs of) a C contour line of h. By
choosing different ψ functions and patching together these arcs, one might
hope to obtain a family of height C contour loops. It requires work to make
all this precise, however, and we will not discuss this here.


References
[DS08]    B. Duplantier and S. Sheffield. Liouville Quantum Gravity and
          KPZ. ArXiv e-prints, August 2008, 0808.1560.

[Dub09] Julien Dubédat. SLE and the free field: partition functions and
        couplings. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 22(4):995–1054, 2009.

[Dud02] R. M. Dudley. Real analysis and probability, volume 74 of Cam-
        bridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Cambridge University
        Press, Cambridge, 2002. Revised reprint of the 1989 original.

[Gro67] Leonard Gross. Abstract Wiener spaces. In Proc. Fifth Berkeley
        Sympos. Math. Statist. and Probability (Berkeley, Calif., 1965/66),
        Vol. II: Contributions to Probability Theory, Part 1, pages 31–42.
        Univ. California Press, Berkeley, Calif., 1967.

[HBB10] C. Hagendorf, D. Bernard, and M. Bauer. The Gaussian Free Field
        and SLE 4 on Doubly Connected Domains. Journal of Statistical
        Physics, 140:1–26, July 2010, 1001.4501.

[IK10]    K. Izyurov and K. Kytölä. Hadamard’s formula and couplings of
          SLEs with free field. ArXiv e-prints, June 2010, 1006.1853.

[Jan97]   Svante Janson. Gaussian Hilbert spaces, volume 129 of Cambridge
          Tracts in Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
          1997.



                                     43
[Pom92] Ch. Pommerenke.        Boundary behaviour of conformal maps.
        Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1992.

[Pro90]   Philip Protter. Stochastic integration and differential equations,
          volume 21 of Applications of Mathematics (New York). Springer-
          Verlag, Berlin, 1990. A new approach.

[RS05]    Steffen Rohde and Oded Schramm. Basic properties of SLE. Ann.
          of Math. (2), 161(2):883–924, 2005.

[RV07]    Brian Rider and Bálint Virág. The noise in the circular law and
          the Gaussian free field. Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN, (2):Art. ID
          rnm006, 33, 2007.

[She03]   Scott Sheffield. Gaussian free fields for mathematicians, 2003,
          arXiv:math.Pr/0312099.

[She05]   S. Sheffield. Local sets of the Gaussian free field: Slides and audio:.
          www.fields.utoronto.ca/audio/05-06/percolation SLE/sheffield1,
          www.fields.utoronto.ca/audio/05-06/percolation SLE/sheffield2,
          www.fields.utoronto.ca/audio/05-06/percolation SLE/sheffield3,
          2005.

[SS]      S. Sheffield and N. Sun. Strong path convergence from loewner
          driving convergence. arXiv:1003.4675.

[SS09]    Oded Schramm and Scott Sheffield. Contour lines of the two-
          dimensional discrete Gaussian free field. Acta Math., 202(1):21–
          137, 2009.

[SW05]    Oded Schramm and David B. Wilson.              SLE coordi-
          nate changes.      New York J. Math., 11:659–669, 2005,
          http://nyjm.albany.edu:8000/j/2005/11-31.html.

[Vai]     N. Vaillant. Probability tutorials: Tutorial 13, Regular Measure.
          www.probability.net.




                                       44
