arXiv:math/0605337v3 [math.PR] 24 Apr 2008
                                                        Contour lines of the
                                             two-dimensional discrete Gaussian free field
                                                         Oded Schramm                  Scott Sheffield


                                                                             Abstract
                                                  We prove that the chordal contour lines of the discrete Gaussian
                                              free field converge to forms of SLE(4). Specifically, there is a constant
                                              λ > 0 such that when h is an interpolation of the discrete Gaussian
                                              free field on a Jordan domain — with boundary values −λ on one
                                              boundary arc and λ on the complementary arc — the zero level line
                                              of h joining the endpoints of these arcs converges to SLE(4) as the
                                              domain grows larger. If instead the boundary values are −a < 0 on
                                              the first arc and b > 0 on the complementary arc, then the convergence
                                              is to SLE(4; a/λ − 1, b/λ − 1), a variant of SLE(4).




                                                                                 1
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                  3
  1.1 Main result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       3
  1.2 Conditional expectation and the height gap . . . . . . . . . .            6
  1.3 GFF definition and background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          10
  1.4 SLE background and prior convergence results . . . . . . . . .           14
  1.5 Precise statement of main result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17
  1.6 Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    21
  1.7 Sequel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     22

2 Preliminaries                                                                23
  2.1 A few general properties of the DGFF . . . . . . . . . . . . .           23
  2.2 Some assumptions and notations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           25
  2.3 Simple random walk background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          26

3 The height gap in the discrete setting                                       28
  3.1 A priori estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     28
  3.2 Near independence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        40
  3.3 Narrows and obstacles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        44
  3.4 Barriers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     51
  3.5 Meeting of random walk and interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         57
  3.6 Coupling and limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       78
  3.7 Boundary values of the interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       82

4 Recognizing the driving term                                             93
  4.1 About the definition of SLE(κ; ρ1 , ρ2 ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
  4.2 A coordinate change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
  4.3 The Loewner evolution of the DGFF interface . . . . . . . . . 96
  4.4 Approximate diffusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
  4.5 Back to chordal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
  4.6 Loewner driving term convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
  4.7 Carathéodory convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
  4.8 Improving the convergence topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121

5 Other lattices                                                              126

Bibliography                                                                  127


                                       2
1     Introduction
1.1    Main result
The two-dimensional massless Gaussian free field (GFF) is a two-dimensional-
time analog of Brownian motion. Just as Brownian motion is a scaling limit
of simple random walks and various other one-dimensional systems, the GFF
is a scaling limit of several discrete models for random surfaces. Among these
is the discrete Gaussian free field (DGFF), also called the harmonic crystal.
We presently discuss the basic definitions and describe the main results of
the current work, postponing an overview of the history and general context
to Section 1.3.
    Let G = (V, E) be a finite graph and let V∂ ⊂ V be some nonempty
set of vertices. Let Ω be the set of functions h : V → R that are zero on
V∂ . Clearly, Ω may be identified with RV rV∂ . The DGFF on G with zero
boundary values on V∂ is the probability measure on Ω whose density with
respect to Lebesgue measure on RV rV∂ is proportional to
                              X        1             2 
                         exp          − h(v) − h(u) .                    (1.1)
                                        2
                            {u,v}∈E


Note that under the DGFF measure, h is a multi-dimensional Gaussian ran-
dom variable. Moreover, the DGFF is a rather natural discrete model for a
random field: the term −(h(v) − h(u))2 /2 corresponding to each edge {u, v}
penalizes functions h which have a large gradient along the edge.
    Now fix some function h∂ : V∂ → R, and let Ωh∂ denote the set of functions
h : V → R that agree with h∂ on V∂ . The probability measure on Ωh∂ whose
density with respect to Lebesgue measure on RV rV∂ is proportional to (1.1)
is the DGFF with boundary values given by h∂ .
    Let T G be the usual triangular grid in the complex√  plane, i.e., the graph
whose vertex set is the integer span of 1 and eπ i/3 = (1+ 3 i)/2, with straight
edges joining v and w whenever |v − w| = 1. A T G-domain D ⊂ R2 ∼           =C
is a domain whose boundary is a simple closed curve comprised of edges and
vertices in T G. Let V = VD be the set of T G-vertices in the closure of D,
let G = GD be the induced subgraph of T G with vertex set VD , and write
V∂ = ∂D ∩ VD . While introducing our main results, we will focus on graphs
GD and boundary sets V∂ of this form (though analogous results hold if we
replace T G with another doubly periodic planar graph; see Section 1.5).


                                       3
    We may assume that any function f : V → R is interpolated to a con-
tinuous function on the closure of D which is affine on each triangle of T G.
We often interpret f as a surface embedded in three dimensions and refer to
f (v) as the height of the surface at v.
    Let ∂D = ∂+ ∪ ∂− be a partition of the boundary of a T G-domain D into
two disjoint arcs whose endpoints are midpoints of two distinct T G-edges
in ∂D. Fix two constants a, b > 0. Let h be an instance of the DGFF on
(GD , V∂ ), with boundary function h∂ equal to −a on the vertices in ∂− and
equal to b on the vertices in ∂+ . Then h (linearly interpolated on triangles)
almost surely assumes the value zero on a unique piecewise linear path γh
connecting the two boundary edges containing endpoints of ∂+ .
    In Section 1.4, we will briefly review the definition of SLE(4) (a particular
type of random chordal path connecting a pair of boundary points of D whose
randomness comes from a one-dimensional Brownian motion), along with the
variants of SLE(4) denoted SLE(4; ρ1 , ρ2 ). Our main result, roughly stated,
is the following:

Theorem 1.1. Let D be a T G-domain, ∂D = ∂+ ∪ ∂− and let h and γh be
as above. There is a constant λ > 0 such that if a = b = λ, then as the
triangular mesh gets finer, the random path γh converges in distribution to
SLE(4). If a, b ≥ λ are not assumed to equal λ, then the convergence is to
SLE(4; a/λ − 1, b/λ − 1).

    See Section 1.5 for a more precise version, which describes the topology
under which convergence is attained. As explained there, we can also prove
convergence in a weaker form when the conditions a, b ≥ λ are relaxed.
    We will elaborate on the role of the constant λ in §1.2. This constant
depends only on the lattice used. Although we do not     pprove it in this paper,
                                                    −1/4
for the triangular grid the value of λ is λT G := 3       π/8 (see Section 1.7).
   Figure 1.1 illustrates a dual perspective on an instance of γh . Here, each
vertex in the closure of a rhombus-shaped T G-domain D is replaced with
a hexagon in the honeycomb lattice. Call hexagons positive or negative
according to the sign of h. Then there is a cluster of positive hexagons
that includes the positive boundary hexagons, a similar cluster of negative
hexagons, and a path γ forming the boundary between these two clusters.
Figure 1.1 depicts a computer generated instance of the DGFF—with ±λ
boundary conditions—and the corresponding γ. Followed from bottom to
top, the interface γ turns right when it hits a negative hexagon, left when it

                                       4
Figure 1.1: (a) DGFF on 90 × 90 hexagon array with boundary values λ on
the right and −λ on the left; faces shaded by height. (b) Surface plot of
DGFF.
                                    5
hits a positive hexagon. It closely tracks the boundary-hitting zero contour
line γh in the following sense: the edges in γ are the duals of the edges of
T G that are crossed by γh . This is because h is almost surely non-zero at
each vertex in V , so whenever a zero contour line contains a point on an
edge of T G, h must be positive on one endpoint of that edge and negative
on the other; hence the dual of that edge separates a positive hexagon from
a negative hexagon.
    In the fine mesh limit, there will be no difference between γ and γh . Thus
(by Theorem 1.1) the path in Figures 1.1.a and 1.2.a approximates SLE(4),
while the path of Figure 1.3.a approximates SLE(4; 2, 2). We will state and
prove most of our results in terms of the dual perspective displayed in the
figures.

1.2    Conditional expectation and the height gap
We derive the following well known facts as a warm-up in Section 2.1 (see
also, e.g., [Gia02]):
Boundary influence: The law of the DGFF with boundary conditions
h∂ : V∂ → R is the same as that of the DGFF with boundary conditions
0 plus a deterministic function h̃∂ : V → R which is the unique discrete
harmonic interpolation of h∂ to V . (By discrete harmonic we mean that
for each v ∈ V r V∂ , the value h(v) is equal to the average value of h(w)
over w adjacent to v.) In particular, the expected value of h(v) is discrete
harmonic in V r V∂ .
Markov property: Let h : V → R be a random function whose law is the
DGFF on G with some boundary values h∂ on V∂ . Then given the values of
h on a superset V0 ⊃ V∂ , the conditional law of h is that of a DGFF on G
with boundary set V0 and with boundary values equal to the given values.
    From these facts it follows that conditioned on the path γ described in
the previous section and on the values of h on the hexagons adjacent to γ,
the expected value of h is discrete harmonic in the remainder of GD . Figures
1.2 and 1.3 illustrate the expected value of h conditioned on the values of h
on the hexagons adjacent to γ.
    The reader may observe in Figure 1.2 that although the expected value
of h given the values along γ varies a great deal among hexagons close to γ,
the expected value at five or ten lattice spacings away from γ appears to be


                                      6
roughly constant along either side of γ. On the other hand in Figure 1.3,
away from γ, the expected height appears to be a smooth but non-constant
function. In a sense we make precise in Section 3 (see Theorem 3.28), the
values −λ and λ describe the expected value of h, conditioned on γ, at the
vertices near (but not microscopically near) the left and right sides of γ; in
the fine mesh limit there is thus an “expected height gap” of 2 λ between the
two sides of γ. In Figure 1.2 the height expectation appears constant away
from γ, because the boundary values of ±λ are the same as the expected
values near (but not microscopically near) γ.
    Once we have established the height gap result, the proof of Theorem 1.1
(at least for the simplest case that the boundary conditions are −λ and λ) is
similar to the proof that the harmonic explorer converges to SLE(4), as given
by the present authors in [SS05], which, in turn, follows the same strategy
as the proof of convergence of the loop-erased random walk to SLE(2) and
the uniform spanning tree Peano curve to SLE(8) in [LSW04].
    We will now briefly describe some of the key ideas in the proof of the
height gap result. The main step is to show that if one samples a vertex z
on γ according to discrete harmonic measure viewed from a typical point far
away from γ, then the absolute value of h(z) is close to independent of the
values of h (and geometry of γ) at points that are not microscopically close
to z. In other words, if we start a random walk S at a typical point in the
interior of D and stop the first time it hits a vertex z which either belongs to
V∂ or corresponds to a hexagon incident to γ, then (conditioned on z 6∈ V∂ ),
the random variable |h(z)| (and in particular its conditional expectation) is
close to independent of the behavior of γ and h at vertices far away from z.
    To prove this, we will actually prove something stronger, namely that (up
to multiplication by −1) the collection of all of the values of h (and the ge-
ometry of γ) in a microscopic neighborhood of z is essentially independent of
the values of h (and the geometry of γ) at points that are not microscopically
close to z. One consequence of our analysis is Theorem 3.21, which states
that if one takes z to be the origin of a new coordinate system and conditions
on the behavior of γ and S outside of a ball of radius R centered at z and
S starts outside that ball, then as R tends to infinity the conditional law
of the interface γ has a weak limit (which is independent of the sequence of
boundary conditions chosen), which is the law of a random infinite path γ on
the honeycomb grid T G∗ (almost surely containing an edge adjacent to the
hexagon centered at the origin z = 0). We will define a function of such infi-
nite paths γ which (in a certain precise sense) describes the expected value of

                                       7
Figure 1.2: (a) Expectation of DGFF with boundary values ±λ given its
values at hexagons bordering interface. (b) Surface plot of the above.

                                  8
Figure 1.3: (a) Expectation of DGFF given its values at hexagons bordering
interface; exterior boundary values are9 −3λ on left, 3λ on right. (b) Surface
plot of the above.
|h(z)| conditioned on γ; the value λ is the expectation of this function when
γ is chosen according to the limiting measure described above.
    We remark that many important problems in statistical physics involve
classifying the measures that can arise as weak limits of Gibbs measures on
finite systems. In such problems, showing the uniqueness of the limiting
measure often involves proving that properties of a random system near the
origin are approximately independent of the properties of the system far away
from the origin. In our case, we need to prove that in some sense the behavior
of the triple (h, γ, S) near the the origin (i.e., the first point S hits γ) is close
to independent of the behavior of (h, γ, S) far from the origin.
    Very roughly speaking, our strategy will be to describe the joint law of
(h, γ, S) near the origin and (h, γ, S) far from the origin by considering a
different measure in which the two are independent and weighting it by the
probability that the inside and outside configurations properly “hook up”
with one another. To get a handle on these “hook up” probabilities, we will
need to develop various techniques to control the probabilities (conditioned
on the values of h on certain sets) that certain zero height level lines hook
up with one another, as well as the probabilities that these level lines avoid
certain regions. We will also need bounds on the probability that there exist
clusters of positive or negative hexagons crossing certain regions; these are
roughly in the spirit of the Russo-Seymour-Welsh theorems for percolation,
but the proofs are entirely different. All of the height gap related results are
proved in Section 3.

1.3     GFF definition and background
To help put our DGFF theorems in context and provide further intuition,
we now briefly recall the definition of the (continuum) GFF and mention
some basic facts described, e.g., in [She07]. Let Hs (D) be the set of smooth
functions supported on compact subsets of a planar domain D, and let
H(D) be its Hilbert
              R       space completion under the Dirichlet inner prod-
uct (f, g)∇ = D ∇f · ∇g dx, where dx refers to area measure. We define an
instance of the Gaussian free field to be the formal sum
                                      X∞
                                 h=      αi fi ,
                                        i=1

where αi are i.i.d. one-dimensional standard (unit variance, zero mean) Gaus-
sians and the fi are an orthonormal basis for H(D). Although the sum does

                                         10
not converge pointwise or in H(D), it does converge in the space of distribu-
tions [She07]. In particular, the sum
                                              ∞
                                              X               
                                 (h, g)∇ :=          αi fi , g ∇
                                              i=1

is almost surely convergent for every g ∈ Hs (D).
    It is worthwhile to take a moment to compare with the situation where
D is one dimensional. P∞If D were a bounded open interval in R, then the
partial sums of h = i=1 αi fi would almost surely converge uniformly to a
limit, whose law is that of the Brownian bridge, having the value zero at
the interval’s endpoints. If D were the interval (0, ∞), then the partial sums
would converge (uniformly on compact sets) to a function whose law is that
of ordinary Brownian motion Bt , indexed by t ∈ [0, ∞), with B0 = 0 [She07].
    Let g be a conformal (i.e., bijective analytic) map from D to another
planar domain D ′ . When g is a rotation, dilation, or translation, it is obvious
that         Z                                  Z
                         −1           −1
                 ∇(f1 ◦ g ) · ∇(f2 ◦ g ) dx = (∇f1 · ∇f2 ) dx.
              D′                                              D
for any f1 , f2 ∈ Hs (D), and an elementary change of variables calculation
gives this equality for any conformal g. Taking the completion to H(D), we
see that the Dirichlet inner product—and hence the two-dimensional GFF—
is invariant under conformal transformations of D.
    Up to a constant, the DGFF on a T G-domain D can be realized as a
projection of the GFF on D onto the subspace of H(D) consisting of functions
which are continuous and are affine on each triangle of D [She07]. Note that
if f is such a function, then
                 √
                   3X
                         |f (j) − f (i)|2 + |f (k) − f (i)|2 + |f (k) − f (j)|2 ,
                                                                               
      (f, f )∇ =
                  6
where the sum is√over all triangles (i, j, k) in VD . This is because the area of
each triangle is 3/4 and the norm of the gradient squared in the triangle is
             2
                |f (j) − f (i)|2 + |f (k) − f (i)|2 + |f (k) − f (j)|2 .
                                                                      
             3
Since each interior edge of D is contained in two triangles, for such f ,
                       X                             3−1/2     X
    kf k2∇ = 3−1/2              |f (j) − f (i)|2 +                      |f (j) − f (i)|2 ,   (1.2)
                                                       2
                     {i,j}∈EI                                {i,j}∈E∂


                                              11
where EI and E∂ are the interiorP and boundary2 (undirected) edges of T G in
D. We will refer to the sum EI |f (j) − f (i)| as the discrete Dirichlet
energy of f . It is equivalent—up to the constant factor 3−1/2 and an additive
term depending only on boundary values of f —to the Dirichlet energy
(f, f )∇ of the piecewise affine interpolation of f to D.
    The above analysis suggests a natural coupling between the GFF and
a sequence of DGFF approximations to the GFF (obtained by taking finer
mesh approximations of the same domain). The GFF can also be obtained as
a scaling limit of other discrete random surface models (e.g., solid-on-solid,
dimer-height-function, and ∇φ-interface models) [Ken01, NS97, Spe97]. Its
Laplacian is a scaling limit of some Coulomb gas models, which describe ran-
dom electrostatic charge densities in two-dimensional domains [Fol01, FS81,
Kos77, KT73, Spe97]. Physicists often use heuristic connections to the GFF
to predict properties of two-dimensional statistical physics models that are
not obviously random surfaces or Coulomb gases (e.g., Ising and Potts mod-
els, O(n) loop models) [dN83, DFMS97, Dup89, Kad78, KN04, Nie82, Nie84].
As a model for the field theory of non-interacting massless bosons, the GFF
is a starting point for many constructions in quantum field theory, conformal
field theory, and string theory [BPZ84, DFMS97, Gaw99, GJ87].
    Because of the conformal invariance of the GFF, physicists and mathe-
maticians have hypothesized that discrete random surface models that are
believed or known to converge to the Gaussian free field (e.g., the discrete
Gaussian free field, the height function of the oriented O(n) loop model
with n = 2, height functions for domino and lozenge tilings) have level sets
with conformally invariant scaling limits [Con89, DS87, DS88, SD87, KDH02,
HK01, Ken01, KH95, KHS00, Nie82]. Our results confirm this hypothesis for
the discrete Gaussian free field.
    Various properties of the DGFF contour lines (such as winding exponents
and the fact that the fractal dimension is 3/2) have been predicted correctly
in the physics literature [Con89, DS88, DS87, SD87, HK01, KDH02, KH95,
KHS00, Nie82]. The techniques used to make these predictions are also
described in detail in the survey papers [Dup89, KN04, Nie84]. Analogous
results about winding exponents and fractal dimension have now been proved
rigorously for SLE [Sch00, RS05, Bef02].
    The study of level lines of the DGFF and related random surfaces is
also related to the study of equipotential lines of random charge distribu-
tions in statistical physics. The so-called two-dimensional Coulomb gas


                                     12
is a model for electrostatics in which the force between charged particles
is inversely proportional to the distance between them. In this model, a
continuous function f ∈ Hs (D) is the Coulomb gas electrostatic po-
tential function (“grounded” at the boundary of D) of −∆f , when ∆f
is interpreted as a charge density function. The value (f, f )∇ is then the
total potential energy—also called the energy of assembly of the charge
distribution −∆f . In the Coulomb gas model, this is the amount of energy
required to move from a configuration in which the charge density is zero
throughout D to a configuration in which the charge density is given by
−∆f .
    In statistical physics, it is often natural to consider a probability distri-
bution on configurations in which the probability of a configuration with po-
tential energy H is proportional to e−H . If ρ is a smooth charge distribution,
then its energy of assembly is given by (−∆−1 ρ, −∆−1 ρ)∇ = (ρ, −∆−1 ρ);
if we define ρ to be the standard Gaussian in ∆H(D) determined by this
quadratic form, then ρ is the Laplacian of the Gaussian free field (which,
like the GFF itself, is well defined as a random distribution but not as a
function). In other words, the Laplacian of a Gaussian free field is a random
distribution that we may interpret as a model for random charge density in
a statistical physical Coulomb gas.
    However, we stress that when physicists refer to the Coulomb gas method
for O(n) model computations, they typically have in mind a more compli-
cated Coulomb gas model in which the charges are required to be discrete
(i.e., ρ is required to be a sum of unit positive and negative point masses)
and hard core constraints may be enforced.
    The surveys [BEMF86, Gia02, Spe97] contain additional references on
lattice spin models that have the GFF as a scaling limit and Coulomb gas
models that have its Laplacian as a scaling limit—for example, the harmonic
crystal (a.k.a. the discrete Gaussian free field) with quadratic nearest-
neighbor potential, the more general anharmonic crystal, the discrete-
height Gaussian (where h is a function on a lattice, with values restricted
to integers), the Villain gas (where h is a function on a lattice and the
values of its discrete Laplacian p = −∆h are restricted to integers), and the
hard core Coulomb gas (where h is a function on a lattice and its discrete
Laplacian p = −∆h is ±1 valued).
    The physics literature on applications of the GFF to field theory and
statistical physics is large, and the authors themselves are only familiar with
parts of it. Outside of these areas, there is a body of experimental and

                                       13
computational research on contour lines of random topographical surfaces,
such as the surface of the earth. Mandelbrot’s famous How Long Is the Coast
of Britain?... [Man67], which prefigured the notion of “fractal” introduced
by Mandelbrot years later, is an early example. The results about contour
lines in these studies (including fractal dimension computations) are less
detailed than the ones provided here and are not all mathematically rigorous.
However, some of the models are similar in spirit to the GFF, involving
functions whose Fourier coefficients are independent Gaussians. An eclectic
overview of this literature appears in [Isi92].

1.4    SLE background and prior convergence results
We now give a brief definition of (chordal) SLE(κ) for κ > 0. See also the
surveys [Wer04, KN04, Law05, Car05] or [Law04]. The discussion below along
with further discussion of the special properties of SLE(4) appears in another
paper by the current authors [SS05]. That paper shows that SLE(4) is the
scaling limit of a random interface called the harmonic explorer (designed in
part to be a toy model for the DGFF contour line addressed here).
    Let T > 0. Suppose that γ : [0, T ] → H is a continuous simple path in
the closed upper half plane H which satisfies γ[0, T ] ∩ R = {γ(0)} = {0}. For
every t ∈ [0, T ], there is a unique conformal homeomorphism gt : H r γ[0, t]
which satisfies the so-called hydrodynamic normalization at infinity
                              lim gt (z) − z = 0 .
                             z→∞

The limit
                     cap∞ (γ[0, t]) := lim z(gt (z) − z)/2
                                      z→∞

is real and monotone increasing in t. It is called the (half plane) capacity
of γ[0, t] from ∞, or just capacity, for short. Since cap∞ (γ[0, t]) is also
continuous in t, it is natural to reparameterize γ so that cap∞ (γ[0, t]) = t.
Loewner’s theorem states that in this case the maps gt satisfy his differential
equation
                                       2
                     ∂t gt (z) =             ,  g0 (z) = z ,              (1.3)
                                 gt (z) − Wt
where Wt = gt (γ(t)). (Since γ(t) is not in the domain of definition of gt ,
the expression gt (γ(t)) should be interpreted as a limit of gt (z) as z → γ(t)
inside H r γ[0, t]. This limit does exist.) The function t → Wt is continuous
in t, and is called the driving parameter for γ.

                                      14
     One may also try to reverse the above procedure. Consider the Loewner
evolution defined by the ODE (1.3), where Wt is a continuous, real-valued
function. For a fixed z, the evolution defines gt (z) as long as |gt (z) − Wt | is
bounded away from zero. For z ∈ H let τz be the first time t ≥ 0 in which
gt (z) and Wt collide, or set τz = ∞ if they never collide. Then gt (z) is well
defined on {z ∈ H : τz ≥ t}. The set Kt := {z ∈ H : τz ≤ t} is sometimes
called the evolving hull of the evolution. In the case discussed above where
the evolution is generated by a simple path γ parameterized by capacity and
satisfying γ(t) ∈ H for t > 0, we have Kt = γ[0, t].
     The path of the evolution is defined as γ(t) = limz→Wt gt−1 (z), where z
tends to Wt from within the upper half plane H, provided that the limit exists
and is continuous. However, this is not always the case. The process (chordal)
SLE(κ) in the upper√ half plane, beginning at 0 and ending at ∞, is the path
γ(t) when Wt is κ Bt , where Bt = B(t) is a standard one-dimensional
                                                                 2
Brownian√ motion. (“Standard” means B(0) = 0 and E[B(t) ] = t, t ≥ 0.
Since ( k Bt : t ≥ 0) has the same distribution as (Bκ t : t ≥ 0), taking
Wt = Bκ t is equivalent.) In this case a.s. γ(t) does exist and is a continuous
path. See [RS05] (κ 6= 8) and [LSW04] (κ = 8).
     We now define the processes SLE(κ; ρ1 , ρ2 ). Given a Loewner evolu-
tion defined by a continuous Wt , we will let xt and yt be defined by xt :=
sup{gt (x) : x < 0, x ∈
                      / Kt } and yt := inf{gt (x) : x > 0, x ∈
                                                             / Kt }. When the
Loewner evolution is generated by a simple path γ(t) satisfying γ(t) ∈ H for
t > 0, these points xt and yt can be thought of as the two images of 0 under
gt . Note that by (1.3)

                  ∂t xt = 2/(xt − Wt ),        ∂t yt = 2/(yt − Wt ) ,       (1.4)

for all t such that xt < Wt < yt . Beginning from an initial time r for
which xr < Wr < yr , we define SLE(κ; ρ1 , ρ2 ) to be the evolution that makes
(xt , Wt , yt ) a solution to the SDE system
         √              ρ1 dt   ρ2 dt            2 dt            2 dt
 dWt =       κ dBt +          +        , dxt =         , dyt =         , (1.5)
                       Wt − xt Wt − yt         xt − Wt         yt − Wt
noting that existence and uniqueness of solutions to this SDE (at least from
the initial time r until the first s > r for which either xs = Ws or Ws = ys )
follow easily from standard results in [RY99]. (The xt and yt are called force
points because they apply a “force” affecting the drift of the process Wt by
an amount inversely proportional to their distance from Wt .)

                                          15
    Some subtlety is involved in extending the definition of SLE(κ; ρ1 , ρ2 )
beyond times when Wt hits the force points, and in starting the process from
the natural initial values x0 = W0 = y0 = 0. This is closely related to the
issues which come up when defining the Bessel processes of dimension less
than two and will be discussed in more detail in Section 4.

    Although many random self-avoiding lattice paths from the statistical
physics literature are conjectured to have forms of SLE as scaling limits,
rigorous proofs have thus far appeared only for a few cases: site perco-
lation cluster boundaries on the hexagonal lattice (SLE(6), [Smi01]; see
also [CN06]), branches (loop-erased random walk) and outer boundaries (ran-
dom Peano curves) of uniform spanning tree (forms of SLE(2) and SLE(8)
respectively, [LSW04]), the harmonic explorer (SLE(4), [SS05]), and bound-
aries of simple random walks (forms of SLE(8/3), [LSW03]).
    In the latter case, conformal invariance properties follow almost immedi-
ately from the conformal invariance of two dimensional Brownian motion. In
each of the other cases listed above, the initial step of the proof is to show
that a certain function of the partially generated paths γ([0, t]), which is a
martingale in t when γ is SLE(κ) for the appropriate κ, has a discrete ana-
log which is (approximately or exactly) a martingale for the discrete paths
and is approximately equivalent to the continuous version in the fine mesh
limit. For loop-erased random walk, harmonic explorer, and uniform span-
ning tree Peano curves, this initial step is the easy part of the argument; it
follows almost immediately from the fact that simple random walk converges
to Brownian motion. The analogous step for site percolation on the hexag-
onal lattice, as given by [Smi01], is an ingenious but nonetheless short and
simple argument.
    By contrast, the analogous step in this paper (which requires the proof
of the height gap lemma, as given in Section 3) is quite involved; it is the
most technically challenging part of the current work and includes many new
techniques and lemmas about the geometry of DGFF contours that we hope
are interesting for their own sake.
    Another way in which the DGFF differs from percolation, the harmonic
explorer, and the uniform spanning tree is that it has a natural continuum
analog (the GFF) which can be easily rigorously constructed without any
reference to SLE, and which is itself (like Brownian motion) an object of
great significance. It becomes natural to ask whether the DGFF results
enable us to define the “contour lines” of the continuum GFF in a canonical

                                     16
way; we plan to answer this question (affirmatively) in a subsequent work
(see Section 1.7).
    A final difference is that, for the DGFF, there is a continuum of choices
for left and right boundary conditions (a and b) which are equally natural a
priori, so we are led to consider a family of paths SLE(4; a/λ − 1, b/λ − 1)
instead of simply SLE(4). (The case a = b = 0 is particularly natural; see
Figure 1.4.) In these processes, the driving parameters Wt are generally
no longer Brownian motions (rather, they are continuous semimartingales
with constant quadratic variation and a drift term that can become singular
on a fractal set). Proving driving parameter convergence to these processes
requires some rather general convergence infrastructure (Section 4.4), which
we hope will be useful in other settings as well.

1.5    Precise statement of main result
Let H be the upper half plane. Let D be any T G-domain and let ∂D = ∂+ ∪∂−
be a partition of the boundary of D into two disjoint arcs whose endpoints
are midpoints of two T G-edges contained in ∂D. As before, let V denote the
vertices of T G in D. Let h∂ = −a on ∂− ∩ V and h∂ = b on ∂+ ∩ V , where a
and b are positive constants.
    Let h : V → R be an instance of the DGFF with boundary conditions h∂ .
Let φD be any conformal map from D to H that maps ∂+ bijectively onto
the positive real ray (0, ∞). (Note that φD is unique up to positive scaling.)
    There is almost surely a unique interface γ ⊂ D between hexagons in the
dual grid T G∗ containing T G-vertices where h is positive and such hexagons
where h is negative such that the endpoints of γ are on ∂D. In fact, the
endpoints of γ are the same as the endpoints of ∂+ . (As mentioned above,
this interface γ stays within a bounded distance from the zero height contour
line γD of the affine interpolation of h.) Now, φD ◦ γ is a random path on
H connecting 0 to ∞. We will show that this path converges to a form of
SLE(4). Rather than considering a fixed domain D̂ and a sequence of discrete
domains Dn approximating D̂, with the mesh tending to 0, we will employ a
setup that is more general in which the mesh is fixed (the triangular lattice
will not be rescaled), and we consider domains D that become “larger”. The
correct sense of “large” is measured by
                         rD = rD,φ := radφ−1 (i) (D) ,
                                            D

where radx (D) denotes the radius of D viewed from x, i.e., inf y6∈D |x − y|.

                                      17
Of course, if φ−1  D (i) is at bounded distance from ∂D, then the image of
the triangular grid under φD is not fine near i, and there is no hope for
approximating SLE by φD ◦ γ.
    We have chosen to use H as our canonical domain (mapping all other
paths into H), because it is the most convenient domain in which to define
chordal SLE. However, to make the completion of H a compact metric space,
we will endow H with the metric it inherits from its conformal map onto the
unit disc U. Namely, we let d∗ (·, ·) be the metric on H ∪ {∞} given by
d∗ (z, w) = |Ψ(z) − Ψ(w)|, where Ψ(z) := (z − i)/(z + i) maps H ∪ {∞}
onto U. If z ∈ H, then d∗ (zn , z) → 0 is equivalent to |zn − z| → 0, and
d∗ (zn , ∞) → 0 is equivalent to |zn | → ∞.
    If γ1 and γ2 are distinct unparametrized simple paths in H, then we define
dU (γ1 , γ2 ) to be the infimum over all pairs (η1 , η2 ) of parameterizations of γ1
and γ2 in [0, 1] (i.e., ηj : [0, 1] → H is a simple
                                                    path satisfying
                                                                    ηj ([0, 1]) = γj
for j = 1, 2) of the uniform distance sup d∗ η1 (t), η2 (t) : t ∈ [0, 1] with
respect to the metric d∗ .
    Our strongest result is in the case where a, b ≥ λ. We prove the following:
Theorem 1.2. There is a constant λ > 0 such that if a, b ≥ λ, then as
rD → ∞, the random paths φD ◦ γ described above converge in distribution
to SLE(4; a/λ − 1, b/λ − 1) with respect to the metric dU .
    In other words, for every ǫ > 0 there is some R = R(ǫ) such that if
rD > R, then there is a coupling of φD ◦ γ and a path γSLE whose law is that
of SLE(4; a/λ − 1, b/λ − 1) such that
                         h                     i
                       P dU (φD ◦ γ, γSLE ) > ǫ < ǫ .

    We first comment that it follows that when rD is large, γ is “close” to
φ−1
 D ◦ γSLE .   For example, if rD → ∞ and rD  −1
                                                D tends to a bounded domain
D̂ whose boundary is a simple closed path in such a way that the bound-
aries of the domains may be parameterized to give uniform convergence of
                               −1                     −1
parameterized paths and if rD     ∂+ converges, then rD  γ converges in law to
the corresponding SLE in D̂. To prove this from Theorem 1.2, we only need
                                       −1 −1
to note that in this case the maps rD    φD converge uniformly in H ∪ {∞}
(see, e.g., [Pom92, Proposition 2.3]).
    When we relax the assumption a, b ≥ λ to a, b > 0, we still prove some
sort of convergence to SLE(4; a/λ − 1, b/λ − 1), but with respect to a weaker
topology. In fact, we can allow a and b to be zero or even slightly negative,

                                         18
but in this case we need to appropriately adjust the above definition of the
interface γ. Say that a hexagon in the hexagonal grid T G∗ dual to T G is
positive if either the center v of the hexagon is in D and h(v) > 0, or v ∈ ∂+ .
Likewise, say that the hexagon is negative if v ∈ D and h(v) < 0, or v ∈ ∂− .
Let γ be the unique oriented path in T G∗ that joins the two endpoints of ∂+ ,
has only positive hexagons adjacent to its right hand side and only negative
hexagons adjacent to its left hand side. (If a, b > 0, this definition clearly
agrees with the previous definition of γ.) We prove:
Theorem 1.3. For every constant Λ̄ > 0 there is a constant Λ0 = Λ0 (Λ̄) > 0
such that if a, b ∈ [−Λ0 , Λ̄] and γ is the DGFF interface defined above, then
as rD → ∞ the Loewner driving term Ŵt of φD ◦ γ parameterized by capacity
from ∞ converges in law to the driving term Wt of SLE(4; a/λ − 1, b/λ − 1)
with respect to the topology of locally uniform convergence. That is, for
every T, ǫ > 0 there is some R > 0 such that if rD > R, then γ and
SLE(4; a/λ − 1, b/λ − 1) may be coupled so that with probability at least 1 − ǫ
                             
                       sup |Ŵt − Wt | : t ∈ [0, T ] < ǫ .
     Some (essentially well-known) geometric consequences of this kind of con-
vergence are proved in §4.7.
     A particularly interesting case of Theorem 1.3 is the case a = 0 and b = 0,
corresponding to the DGFF with zero boundary values. In this case, when h
is interpolated linearly to triangles, its zero level set will almost surely include
a finite number of piecewise linear arcs in D whose endpoints on ∂D are ver-
tices of T G. A dual representation of this set of arcs is shown in Figure 1.4.
For any fixed choice of endpoints on the boundary, the interface connecting
those endpoints will converge to SLE(4; −1, −1). The limit of the complete
set of arcs in Figure 1.4 is in some sense a coupling of SLE(4; −1, −1) pro-
cesses, one for each pair of boundary points.
   Finally, we discuss the generalizations: replace T G with an arbitrary
weighted doubly periodic planar lattice—i.e., a connected planar graph G ⊂
R2 invariant under two linearly independent translations, T1 , T2 , such that
every compact subset of R2 meets only finitely many vertices and edges,
together with a map w from the edges of G to the positive reals, which is
invariant under T1 and T2 .
   A G-domain D ⊂ R2 is a domain whose boundary is a simple closed
curve comprised of edges and vertices in G. Let V = VD be the set of G-
vertices in the closure of D, let G = GD = (V, E) be the induced subgraph

                                        19
Figure 1.4: Zero height interfaces starting and ending on the boundary, shown
for the discrete GFF on a 150×150 hexagonal array with zero boundary. Inte-
rior white hexagons have height greater than 0; interior black hexagons have
height less than 0; boundary hexagons (of height zero) are black. Hexagons
that are not incident to a zero height interface that reaches the boundary are
gray.




                                     20
of G with vertex set VD , and write V∂ = ∂D ∩ VD . Given a boundary value
function h∂ : V∂ → R, the edge weighted DGFF on G has a density with
respect to Lebesgue measure on RV rV∂ which is proportional to
                      X       1                    2 
                 exp         − w {u, v} h(v) − h(u) .
                               2
                       {u,v}∈E

If every face of G has three edges, then every vertex in the dual graph is
an endpoint of exactly three edges, and the boundary between positive and
negative faces can be defined as a simple path in this dual lattice, similar to
the one shown in Figures 1.1.a. If not every face of G has three edges, then
we may “triangulate” G by adding additional edges to G, while maintaining
the invariance under T1 and T2 , to make this the case (and set w to zero on
these edges so that their presence does not affect the law of the DGFF).
    We define the weighted random   P walk on G to be the Markov chain with
transition probability w({u, v})/ v′ w({u, v ′}) from u to v, where we take
w({u, v}) = 0 unless u and v are neighbors in G. It is well known and
easy to prove that such a walk on the re-scaled lattice ǫG converges to a
linear transformation of time-scaled two-dimensional Brownian motion when
ǫ tends to zero (but since we could not find a reference, we very briefly explain
this in §5). It is convenient to replace the embedding of G into R2 described
above with a linear transformation of that embedding that causes this limit
to be standard Brownian motion.
Theorem 1.4. Both Theorem 1.3 and Theorem 1.2 continue to hold if T G is
replaced by a general weighted doubly periodic planar lattice G, as described
above, provided that G is embedded in R2 in such a way that the weighted
random walk converges to Brownian motion.
   If G is the grid Z2 , then one natural way to triangulate G is to add all the
edges of the form {(x, y), (x+1, y +1)}. Another would be to add edges of the
form {(x, y), (x+1, y −1)}. The above theorem implies, perhaps surprisingly,
that the limiting law of the zero height interface is the same in either case,
with no need for a linear change of coordinates.

1.6    Outline
Section 2 introduces the basic notation and assumptions that are necessary
for the height gap results proved in Section 3. Sections 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, and

                                       21
3.4 develop bounds and estimates related to the geometry of zero height
interfaces. The random walk S comes into the picture in Section 3.5, where
we develop results about the near-independence of the triple (h, γ, S) on
microscopic and macroscopic scales. Section 3.6 applies these results to prove
uniqueness of the limiting measure, namely Theorem 3.21, and Section 3.7
applies this to prove our main height gap result, Theorem 3.28.
    Based on Theorem 3.28, the convergence in the case where the boundary
values are ±λ is not too hard, using the method from [LSW04]. However,
to prove the convergence to SLE(4; a/λ − 1, b/λ − 1) in Section 4, we need
to contend with a few other issues which stem from the fact that the driving
parameter of SLE(4; a/λ − 1, b/λ − 1) is the solution to an SDE with a drift
term that blows up to infinity on a fractal set of times. To overcome these
difficulties, we change coordinates to a coordinate system in which the drift
terms stay bounded. In §4.4 we define and study approximate diffusions.
These are random processes that are not necessarily Markov, but satisfy an
approximate discrete version of an SDE. The Loewner driving term of the
DGFF interface (before going to the scaling limit) is the approximate diffu-
sion we are interested in. The main point is that an approximate diffusion
of an SDE is shown to be close to the corresponding true diffusion satisfy-
ing the same SDE, under appropriate regularity conditions. This is how the
convergence of the driving term of the DGFF interface to the driving term
of the corresponding SLE(κ; ρ1 , ρ2 ) is established. In sections §4.7 and §4.8
more geometric convergence results are deduced from the convergence of the
Loewner driving term of the interface.
    Finally, the rather brief Section 5 then describes the (very minor) modi-
fications required for the generalization to other lattices, Theorem 1.4.

1.7    Sequel
This paper is actually the first of two papers the current authors are writing
about this subject. In the second paper we will make sense of the “contour
lines” of the continuum GFF. An instance h of the continuum GFF is a
random distribution, not a random function; however, given an instance
of the GFF on a domain D, we can project h onto the space of functions
which are piecewise linear on a triangulation of D to yield an instance of the
DGFF which is, in some sense, a piecewise linear approximation to h. We
can then define the level lines of the GFF to be the limits of the level lines
of its piecewise linear approximations (after proving that these limits exist).

                                      22
We will also characterize these random paths directly—without reference to
discrete approximations—by showing that they are the unique path-valued
functions of h which satisfy a simple Markov property. Similar techniques
allow us to describe the contour lines of h that form loops (instead of starting
and ending at points on the boundary of D).
    The determination of the value of λ for a given lattice is not too hard,
but fits better with the general spirit of our next
                                                  p paper on the subject, in
which we will prove, in particular, λT G = 3−1/4 π/8. If the DGFFp     is scaled
so that its fine mesh limit is the ordinary GFF, we have λ = π/8.
Acknowledgments. We wish to thank John Cardy, Julien Dubédat, Bertrand
Duplantier, Richard Kenyon, Jané Kondev, and David Wilson for inspiring
and useful conversations, and thank Alan Hammond and an anonymous ref-
eree for numerous remarks on an earlier version of this paper.


2     Preliminaries
2.1    A few general properties of the DGFF
In this subsection, we recall a few well-known properties of the DGFF that
are valid on any finite graph. Let (V, E) be a finite graph, and let V∂ ⊂ V
be a nonempty set of vertices. Let h denote a sample from the DGFF with
boundary values given by some function h∂ : V∂ → R.
    When f is a function on V , the discrete gradient ∇f is the functionon
the set of ordered pairs (v, u) such that {v, u} ∈ E defined by ∇f (u, v) =
f (v) − f (u). When defining the norm of the gradient we sum over undirected
edges, i.e., we write
                                     X                 2
                      k∇f (v)k2 =         f (v) − f (u) .               (2.1)
                                     {u,v}∈E

                                                                2
Thus, the probability density of h is proportional to e−k∇h(v)k /2 . Therefore,
when h∂ = 0 on V∂ , h is a standard Gaussian with respect to the norm k∇hk
on Ω. The (discrete) Dirichlet inner product that defines this norm can be
written                      X                            
               (f, g)∇ =          f (v) − f (u) g(v) − g(u) .             (2.2)
                           {u,v}∈E




                                        23
                       P                
   Now write ∆f (v) = u∼v f (u) − f (v) , where the sum is over all neigh-
bors u of v. By expanding and rearranging the summands in (2.2), we find
                             (f, g)∇ = −(∆f, g) .                          (2.3)

    Let V0 ⊂ VD . We claim that the vector space of functions f : V → R
that are zero on V r V0 , and the vector space of functions f : V → R that
are discrete-harmonic on V0 (i.e., ∆f = 0 on V0 ) are orthogonal to each
other with respect to the inner product (·, ·)∇ , and together they span RV .
This basic observation will be used frequently below. Indeed, that they are
orthogonal follows immediately from (2.3), and a dimension count now shows
that the two spaces together span RV .
    The following consequence of this orthogonality property will be used
below. Let V0 ⊂ V satisfy V0 ⊃ V∂ and let h0 denote the function that is
discrete harmonic in V r V0 and equal to h in V0 . Then h − h0 and h0 are
independent random variables, because h = h0 +(h−h0 ) is the corresponding
orthogonal decomposition of h. It also follows that
   h − h0 is the DGFF in V r V0 with zero boundary values on V0 .          (2.4)
Observe that the Markov property and the effect of boundary conditions that
were mentioned in §1.2 are immediate consequences of (2.4). An additional
                                                                       2
useful consequence is that the law of h0 is proportional to e−(h0 ,h0 )∇ /2 times
Lebesgue measure on RV0 .
   We now derive a useful well-known expression for the expectation of
h(v) h(u):
                                  
           E h(v) h(u) − E h(v) E h(u) = G(u, v)/ deg(v) ,        (2.5)
where G(u, v) is the expected number of visits to v by a simple random
walk started at u before it hits V∂ and deg(v) is the degree of v; that is,
the number of edges incident with it. (The function G is known as the
Green function.) As we have noted in the introduction, h is the sum of the
discrete harmonic extension of h∂ and a DGFF with zero boundary values. It
therefore
       suffices to prove
                         (2.5) in the case where h∂ = 0 on V∂ . In this case,
E h(v) = 0 = E h(u) . Setting Gv (u) = G(u, v), we observe (or recall) that
∆Gv (u) = − deg(v) 1v (u). Thus,
                                       (h, ∆Gv ) (2.3) (h, Gv )∇
                 h(v) = (h, 1v ) = −               =             .
                                        deg(v)          deg(v)

                                        24
If X is a standard Gaussian in Rn , and x, y ∈ Rn , then E (X · x) (X · y) =
                                                                         

x · y. Consequently, we have when h∂ = 0
                                   
            E (h, Gv )∇ (h, Gu )∇       (Gv , Gu )∇
 E h(v) h(u) =                        =
                 deg(v) deg(u)          deg(v) deg(u)
                                    −(Gv , ∆Gu )      (Gv , 1u )   G(u, v)
                               =                  =              =         .
                                   deg(v) deg(u)       deg(v)      deg(v)

This proves (2.5).

2.2    Some assumptions and notations
We will make frequent use of the following notations and assumptions:

 (h) A bounded domain (nonempty, open, connected set) D ⊂ R2 whose
     boundary ∂D is a subgraph of T G is fixed. The set of vertices of T G
     in D is denoted by VD and V∂ denotes the set of vertices in ∂D. A
     constant Λ̄ > 0 is fixed, as well as a function h∂ : V∂ → R satisfying
     kh∂ k∞ ≤ Λ̄. The DGFF on D with boundary values given by h∂ is
     denoted by h. Also set V = VD = VD ∪ V∂ .

    We denote by T G∗ the hexagonal grid which is dual to the triangular
lattice T G—so that each hexagonal face of T G∗ is centered at a vertex of
T G. Generally, a T G∗ -hexagon will mean a closed hexagonal face of T G∗ .
Denote by BR the union of all T G∗ -hexagons that intersect the ball B(0, R).
    Sometimes, in addition to (h) we will need to assume:

 (D) The domain D is simply connected, and (to avoid minor but annoying
     trivialities) ∂D is a simple closed curve. We fix two distinct midpoints
     of T G-edges x∂ and y∂ on ∂D. Let the counterclockwise [respectively,
     clockwise] arc of ∂D from x∂ to y∂ be denoted by ∂+ [respectively, ∂− ].

    If H ⊂ D is a T G∗ -hexagon, we write h(H) as a shorthand for the value
of h on the center of H (which is a vertex of T G). Assuming (h) and (D), let
D+ denote the union of all T G∗ -hexagons contained in D where h is positive
together with the intersection of D with T G∗ -hexagons centered at vertices
in ∂+ . Let D− be the closure of D r D+ (which a.s. consists of T G∗ -hexagons
in D where h < 0 and the intersection of D with T G∗ -hexagons whose center
is in ∂− ). Then ∂D− ∩∂D+ necessarily consists of the interface we previously

                                     25
called γ, and a collection of disjoint simple closed paths. We use the term
interface (or zero height interface) to describe a simple (or simple closed)
path in ∂D− ∩ ∂D+ oriented so that D+ is on its right. (That is, oriented
clockwise around D+ .)
    Throughout, the notation O(s) represents any quantity f such that |f | ≤
C s for some absolute constant C. We use the notation OΛ̄ (s) if the constant
also depends on Λ̄. When introducing a constant c, we often write c = c(a, b)
as shorthand to indicate that c may depend on a and b.

2.3    Simple random walk background
We need to recall a very useful property of the harmonic measure of simple
random walk.

Lemma 2.1 (Hit near). Let v be a vertex of the grid T G, and let H be a
connected subgraph of T G. Set d = diam(H). The probability that a simple
random walk on T G started from v exits the ball B(v, d) before hitting H is
at most c (dist(v, H)/d)ζ1 , where c and ζ1 ∈ (0, 1) are absolute constants.
   Likewise, the same bound applies to the probability that a simple random
walk started at some vertex outside B(v, d) will hit B v, dist(v, H) before
H.

    In fact, we may take ζ1 = 1/2. The continuous version of this statement
is known as the Beurling projection theorem (the extremal case is when H
is a line segment). The above statement can probably be deduced from the
discrete Beurling theorem as given in [Law91, 2.5.2], though the setting there
is slightly different. In any case, since we do not require any particular value
for ζ1 , the lemma is rather easily proved directly (see [Sch00, Lemma 2.1]).
   We will also use the (well-known) discrete Harnack principle, in the fol-
lowing form.

Lemma 2.2 (Harnack principle). Let D, V, V∂ and VD be as in (h), let v, u ∈
VD , and let f : V → R be discrete-harmonic in VD .

  1. If v and u are neighbors, then

                     |f (v) − f (u)| ≤ O(1) kf k∞/ dist(v, ∂D) .



                                      26
  2. If we assume that f ≥ 0 and that there is a path of length ℓ from v to
     u whose minimal distance to ∂D is ρ, then
                                                      
                        f (u) ≥ f (v) exp −O(ℓ + ρ)/ρ .

    The proof of Statement 1 can be obtained by noting that f (v) is the
expected value of f evaluated at the first hitting point on V∂ of a random walk
started at v, and observing that a random walk started at v and a random
walk started at u may be coupled so that they meet before reaching a distance
of r := dist(v, ∂D) with probability 1 − O(1/r) and walk together after they
meet. (See also the more general [LSW04, Lemma 6.2], for example.)
    To prove Statement 2, let W := {w ∈ V : f (w) ≥ f (v)}, and observe
that the maximum principle implies that W contains a path from v to ∂D.
If we assume that ℓ ≤ ρ/2, then a random walk started at u has probability
bounded away from zero to hit W before ∂D, which by the Optional Sampling
Theorem implies 2 in this case. The case ℓ > ρ/2 now follows by induction
on ⌈2 ℓ/ρ⌉.
    We also need the following well-known estimate on the Green function
G(u, v).
Lemma 2.3. Let D, VD and V be as in (h), let u, v ∈ VD , and let ǫ > 0.
Set r := dist(u, ∂D), and suppose that within distance r/ǫ from u there is a
connected component of ∂D of diameter at least ǫ r. If |u − v| ≤ 2 r/3, say,
then GD (v, u) (the expected number of visits to u by a simple random walk
starting at v before hitting ∂D) satisfies
                                                      r+1
                   GD (v, u) = exp Oǫ (1) log                   .
                                                    |u − v| + 1

  The probability HD (v, u) that random walk started from v hits u before
∂D can be expressed as GD (v, u)/GD (u, u) and hence by the lemma
                                                log(|u − v| + 1) 
               HD (v, u) = exp Oǫ (1)        1−                      .    (2.6)
                                                     log(r + 1)
    Let pR denote the probability that simple random walk started at 0 does
not return to 0 before exiting the ball B(0, R). We now show that the lemma
follows from the well-known estimate

                        pR = exp(O(1))/ log(R + 2) .                      (2.7)

                                        27
In the setting of the lemma, consider some vertex w ∈ VD such that |w −u| >
r. It is easy to see that with probability bounded away from zero (by a
function of ǫ), a simple random walk started from w will hit ∂D before u.
Hence, q := min{1 − HD (w, u) : w ∈ VD r B(u, r)} is bounded away from 0
by a positive function of ǫ. Clearly,
                        (q pr )−1 ≥ GD (u, u) ≥ (pr )−1 .
This proves the case u = v of the lemma from (2.7). Now start a simple
random walk at a vertex v 6= u satisfying |v − u| ≤ 2 r/3, and let the walk
stop when it hits ∂D. It is easy to see that the probability that the walk
visits v after exiting the ball B(v, |v − u|/4), say, is within a bounded factor
from HD (v, u). Therefore, the expected number of visits to v after exiting
B(v, |v − u|/4) is withing a bounded factor of GD (v, u). But the former is
the same as GD (v, v) − GB(v,|v−u|/4) (v, v). The lemma follows.
    We have not found a reference proving (2.7) in a way that generalizes to
the setting of Theorem 1.4, though the result is well-known. In fact, it easily
follows from Rayleigh’s method, as explained in [DS84, §2.2]. In that book,
the goal is to show that pR → 0 as R → ∞ for lattices in the plane but not
in R3 . However, the method easily yields the quantitative bounds (2.7).


3     The height gap in the discrete setting
3.1    A priori estimates
This subsection contains some technical (and uninspiring) estimates that
are necessary to carry out the technical (but hopefully interesting) coupling
argument of the later parts of the section.
    Suppose that β is some path in the hexagonal grid T G∗ , which has a
positive probability to be a subset of a zero height interface h. We will need
to understand rather well the behavior of h conditioned on β being a subset
of a contour line. This conditioning amounts to conditioning h to be positive
on vertices adjacent to β on one side and negative on vertices adjacent to β
on the other side. (Here and in the following, a vertex v of T G is adjacent
to β if β intersects the interior of one of the six boundary edges of the T G∗ -
hexagon centered at v.) Thus, the following lemma will be rather useful.
Lemma 3.1 (Expectation bounds). There is a finite c = c(Λ̄) > 0 such that
the following holds. Assume (h). Let V+ and V− be nonempty disjoint subsets

                                       28
of VD , and set U := V∂ ∪ V+ ∪ V− . Suppose that every vertex in V+ has a
neighbor in V− ∪ V∂ and every vertex in V− has a neighbor in V+ ∪ V∂ . Let K
be the event that h > 0 on V+ and h < 0 on V− . Then for every v ∈ V+ ∪ V− ,

                             E e|h(v)| K < c ,
                                        
                                                                        (3.1)

and
                          c−1 < E |h(v)| K < c .
                                         
                                                                          (3.2)
Moreover
                            E |h(v)|−1/2 K < c .
                                         
                                                                          (3.3)
Let B ⊂ D be a disk whose radius r is smaller than its distance to U. Assume
that B ∩ VD 6= ∅. Then
                    h                               i
                   E max{|h̄(v)| : v ∈ VD ∩ B} K < c ,                  (3.4)

where h̄ denotes the discrete harmonic extension of the restriction of h to
U (which is also the conditional expectation of h given its restriction to U).
Moreover, if ǫ > 0 and U has a connected component whose distance from B
is R and whose diameter is at least ǫ R, then
               h              X         2   i              R
             E |VD ∩ B|−1           h(v)    K ≤ c + c′ log ,              (3.5)
                             v∈V ∩B
                                                              r
                                D


where c′ = c′ (ǫ).
Proof. The proof of(3.1) is a maximum principle type argument.
                                                                Suppose
that v1 maximizes E e|h(v)| K among v ∈ U, and let M := E e|h(v1 )| K .
                                                                           

Clearly, M < ∞. Assume first that v1 ∈ V+ . Set Ṽ := U r {v1 }, and for
v ∈ Ṽ let pv be the probability that simple random walk starting at v1 first
hits Ṽ in v. We may write

                               h(v1 ) = X + Y ,

where                                 X
                               Y :=          pv h(v)                      (3.6)
                                      v∈Ṽ

and X is acentered Gaussian independent from (h(v) : v ∈ Ṽ ). Moreover,
             2
               
by (2.5), E X is 1/6 times the expected number of visits to v1 by a simple

                                       29
random walk starting from v1 until it first hits Ṽ . Set a := E[X 2 ]. Since v1
has a neighbor in Ṽ , it follows that a = O(1). Also, clearly, a is bounded
away from zero, since this random walk has at least one visit to v1 .
   For every y ∈ R we have

  E eh(v1 ) Y = y, K = E eX+y Y = y, K
                                    
                                              R∞
                                               −y
                                                  exp(x − x2 /(2a)) dx
                      = ey E eX X + y > 0 = ey R ∞
                                        
                                                                       .
                                                −y
                                                   exp(−x2 /(2 a)) dx

If y > 0, the right hand side is bounded by O(ey ). If y ≤ 0, then both integrals
on the right are comparable to their value when the upper integration limit is
reduced to −y + 1. But then the ratio between the corresponding integrands
is bounded by e1−y , which implies the same for the ratio of the integrals.
Consequently, the right hand side is O(1) when y ≤ 0. We take expectations
conditioned on K and get

                         M = O(1) E eY K + O(1) .
                                            
                                                                            (3.7)

Repeated use of Hölder’s inequality shows that for non-negative random     Pn vari-
ables x1 , . ..Q
                , xn and non-negative constants p 1 , . . . , p n such that  1 pj ≤ 1
                  n pj   Qn      pj
we have E 1 xj ≤ 1 E[xj ] . Thus, (3.6) and (3.7) give
                                   Y        pv
                     M ≤ O(1)       E eh(v) K + O(1) .
                                   v∈Ṽ

Clearly,                                
                                        1        v ∈ V− ,
                                       
                         E eh(v)
                          
                                     K ≤ M        v ∈ V+ ,
                                        
                                         Λ̄
                                         e        v ∈ V∂ .
                P
Setting p+ :=     v∈Ṽ ∩V+ pv , we therefore obtain


                        M ≤ O(1) M p+ e(1−p+ )Λ̄ + O(1) .                      (3.8)

Since v1 has a neighbor in U r V+ , we have p+ ≤ 5/6 and M ≤ O(1) eΛ̄
follows. A symmetric argument applies if v1 ∈ V− . If v1 ∈ V∂ , then obviously
M ≤ eΛ̄ . Thus (3.1) holds with c = O(eΛ̄ ). The right hand inequality in (3.2)
is an immediate consequence of (3.1) (possibly with a different c).

                                          30
     We now prove (3.4). Given v ∈ VD and u ∈ U let H(v, u) denote the
probability that simple random walk started at v first hits U at u. Suppose
v, v ′ ∈ B ∩ VD and u ∈ U. The discrete Harnack principle (Lemma 2.2) then
gives H(v ′, u) ≤ H(v, u) O(1). Thus,
                          X                  X
             |h̄(v ′ )| =   H(v ′, u) h(u) ≤   O(1) H(v, u) |h(u)| .
                      u∈U                  u∈U

The right hand side therefore bounds max{|h̄(v ′ )| : vP
                                                       ′
                                                         ∈ VD ∩ B}. Now, (3.4)
follows from the right hand inequality of (3.2) and u∈U H(v, u) = 1.
    We now prove (3.3). Consider some      v ∈ V+ . We first claim that if w
                          / U, then E h(w)2 K = OΛ̄ (1). To see this, first
                                       
neighbors with v and w ∈
note that h(w) (where as above h is the discrete harmonic extension of the
values of h on U) is a linear combination of the values h(v) for v ∈ U (which
are the same as the values of h there); since each of these values has mean
and variance which are OΛ̄ (1) (by (3.1)), the mean and variance of h(w) are
also OΛ̄ (1). By (2.5), conditioned on h, the value h(w) is Gaussian with
variance 1/6 times the expected number of times a random walk started at
w visits w before hitting U, which is O(1) because U contains a neighbor of
w.
    Let Z denote the average
                            of h on the neighbors of v, and let Z ′ := h(v)−Z.
The above implies that E Z 2 K = OΛ̄ (1). Since Z ′ is a centered gaussian
                                   

with variance 1/6, for every z ∈ R,

  E h(v)−1/2 K, Z = z = E (Z ′ + z)−1/2 Z ′ + z > 0
                                                 
                                               R ∞ −1/2 −6(x−z)2 /2
                                                  x     e           dx
                                            = 0 R ∞ −6(x−z)2 /2        .
                                                  0
                                                      e         dx

If z ≥ −2, then this is clearly bounded. Assume therefore that z < −2. It
is easy to verify that the integrals in the numerator and denominator  are
                                                                   −1
                                                             
comparable to the same integrals restricted to the range x ∈ 0, |z| . But
in this range, the maximum value of exp(−6(x − z)2 /2) is comparable to the
minimum value of the same quantity. Consequently, when z < −2,

  E h(v)−1/2 K, Z = z
                       
            R |z|−1 −1/2 −6(x−z)2 /2          R |z|−1 −1/2
                   x     e           dx               x     dx
     = O(1) 0 R |z|−1         2
                                        = O(1) 0 R |z|−1       = O(1) |z|1/2 ,
                 0
                      e−6(x−z) /2 dx               0
                                                         dx

                                      31
which gives

                E h(v)−1/2 K = O(1) + O(1) E |Z|1/2 K .
                                                        


Since E Z 2 K = OΛ̄ (1), we certainly have E |Z|1/2 K = OΛ̄ (1). This
                                                       

proves (3.3). Now the left hand inequality in (3.2) is an immediate conse-
quence.
    We now prove (3.5). Consider two vertices v, u ∈ B ∩ VD . Assume that
within distance R from  B there is a connected component of U of diameter
at least ǫ R. Since E h(v) K, h̄ = h̄(v), we have
                                                                    
 E h(v)h(u) K = E (h(v) − h̄(v))(h(u) − h̄(u)) K + E h̄(v)h̄(u) K .
                                                                       (3.9)
Now, h̄(v) is just a weighted average of h(w) with w ∈ U (according to
harmonic measure from v). Consequently,

        E h̄(v)2 K ≤ max E h(w)2 K ≤ max 2 E e|h(w)| K ≤ 2 c
                                                         
                        w∈U                   w∈U

and Cauchy-Schwarz implies that the last summand in (3.9) is also bounded
by 2 c. Since h − h̄ is the Gaussian free field with zero boundary values on
U and is independent from the restriction of h to U, by (2.5)
                                                       
                      E (h(v) − h̄(v))(h(u) − h̄(u)) K

is 1/6 times the expected number of visits to u by a random walker started
at v which stops when it hits U. Thus
                   X                                    
                        E (h(v) − h̄(v))(h(u) − h̄(u)) K
                 u∈B∩VD


is 1/6 times the expected number of steps that the walker spends in B, which
is
                          Oǫ (1) |B ∩ VD | log(R/r) ,
by Lemma 2.3. The estimate (3.5) is now obtained by averaging (3.9) over
all v, u ∈ B ∩ VD .
    The following lemma provides a variant of the right hand bound in (3.2) in
the case where instead of looking for a zero height interface of h, we consider
instead a zero height interface of h − g, for some fixed function g.

                                      32
Lemma 3.2 (Further expectation bounds). In the setting of Lemma 3.1,
suppose that g : D → R is zero on V∂ and Lipschitz in D. Let Kg be the
event that h > g on V+ and h < g on V− . Then for every v ∈ V+ ∪ V− ,
                                                                 kgk∞
              E |h(v) − g(v)| Kg ≤ c (1 + Λ̄) + c                           ,   (3.10)
                                                                 log(q + 2)
where c > 0 is a universal constant and q = kgk∞ /k∇gk∞.
Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of Lemma 3.1. Suppose that v1
maximizes E[h(v) − g(v) | Kg ] among v ∈ V+ , and let M := E[h(v1 ) − g(v1 ) |
Kg ]. By symmetry, it is enough to get a bound on M. We define Ṽ , X, Y
and pv as in the proof of Lemma 3.1.
    For every y ∈ R we have
                                                                    
  E h(v1 ) − g(v1 ) Y = y, Kg = E X + y − g(v1) X + y − g(v1 ) > 0
                                                   ≤ O(1) + (y − g(v1 ))+ ,
where (x)+ := max{0, x}. Consequently,
                                    
     M ≤ O(1) + E (Y − g(v1 ))+ Kg
                 X                          
        ≤ O(1) +     pv E (h(v) − g(v1))+ Kg
                     v∈Ṽ
                     X                            X
         ≤ O(1) +           pv E (h(v) − g(v))+ Kg +  pv g(v) − g(v1 )
                     v∈Ṽ                                        v∈Ṽ
                                X             X
         ≤ O(1) + Λ̄ + M               pv +          pv g(v) − g(v1 ) .
                                v∈V+          v∈Ṽ

Consider a simple random walk started at v1 and stopped when it first hits
Ṽ . Denote the vertex where it first hits Ṽ by w. (Then, P[v = w] = pv .) Set
r := q/ log(q + 2). Since v1 has a neighbor in Ṽ , we have P |v − v1 | > r ≤
O(1)/ log(r + 2), by standard random walk estimates. When |v − v1 | ≤ r, we
have |g(v) − g(v1 )| ≤ O(1) r k∇gk∞ . Therefore,
 X                                                 kgk∞              kgk∞
      pv g(v) − g(v1 ) ≤ O(1) r k∇gk∞ + O(1)                ≤ O(1)             .
                                                 log(r + 2)        log(q + 2)
 v∈Ṽ

This gives
                       X                                        kgk∞
                 M              pv ≤ O(1) + Λ̄ + O(1)                    .
                                                              log(q + 2)
                     v∈Ṽ rV+


                                               33
          P
Because       v∈Ṽ rV+ pv is bounded away from zero, the proof is now complete.


    Our next result establishes the continuity of the conditional distribution
of h in the specified data. More precisely,
Proposition 3.3 (Heights interface continuity). For every ǫ > 0 there is
some R = R(ǫ, Λ̄) > 1/ǫ such that the following holds. Let D, VD , V∂ , h∂ , V+ ,
V− , U and K be as in Lemma 3.1, and let D̂, V̂D , V̂∂ , ĥ∂ , V̂+ , V̂− , Û and K̂ be
another such system, which is also assumed to satisfy kĥ∂ k∞ ≤ Λ̄. Let hK be
a DGFF in D with boundary values given by h∂ conditioned on K, and let hK̂
be a DGFF in D̂ with boundary values given by ĥ∂ conditioned on K̂. Suppose
that within BR , the two systems are the same; that is, D ∩ BR = D̂ ∩ BR ,
h∂ |BR = ĥ∂ |BR , V+ ∩ BR = V̂+ ∩ BR and V− ∩ BR = V̂− ∩ BR . Further
suppose that 0 ∈ U. Then there is a coupling of h  K and of hK̂ such that for
every vertex v ∈ B1/ǫ we have E |hK (v) − hK̂ (v)| < ǫ.
   The following lemma will be needed in the proof.
Lemma 3.4. Let X be a one dimensional Gaussian of zero mean and unit
variance. Let x, x̂ ∈ R, let Z be a random variable whose distribution is the
same as that of X + x conditioned on X + x > 0, and let Ẑ be a random
variable whose distribution is the same as that of X + x̂ conditioned on X +
x̂ > 0. Then there is a coupling of Z and Ẑ such that |Z − Ẑ| < |x− x̂| almost
surely if x 6= x̂. Moreover,
                             there is a continuous function δ(x, x̂) satisfying
δ(x, x̂) < 1 such that E |Z − Ẑ| ≤ δ(x, x̂) |x − x̂| under this coupling.
   The coupling that we use is what is known as the quantile coupling of Z
and Ẑ.
Proof. Let F (s) = P[X < s], and let G = F −1 . Set t := F (−x), t̂ :=
F (−x̂). Let p be a random    variable uniformly distributed in [0, 1]. Then
Z(t) := x + G t + p (1 − t) = G(t + p − t p) − G(t) has the same distribution
                                
as Z. Therefore, Z(t), Z(t̂) is a coupling of Z and Ẑ. Consequently, to
verify the first claim it is sufficient to show that |∂t Z(t)| < ∂t G(t). In fact,
we will prove the stronger statement, −∂t G(t) < ∂t Z(t) < 0 for all p ∈ (0, 1),
which is equivalent to
                          0 < ∂t G(t + p − t p) < ∂t G(t) .
The left hand inequality is immediate, because G′ > 0 on (0, 1). The right
hand inequality translates to (1 − p) G′(t + p − t p) < G′ (t), which we rewrite

                                          34
as 1 − (t + p − t p) G′ (t + p − t p) < (1 − t) G′ (t). This is equivalent to
                         

(1 − tp )/F ′ (G(tp )) < (1 − t)/F ′ (G(t)), where tp := t + p − t p > t. Now, note
that
                     R∞
                         exp(−s2 /2) ds
                                            Z ∞                   Z ∞
        1−t           −x                         (x2 −s2 )/2               2

        ′
                 =              2
                                         =      e            ds =     exs−s /2 ds
     F (G(t))           exp(−x /2)           −x                    0

is strictly decreasing in t, because x is strictly decreasing in t. This proves
the first claim. The second claim follows with
                             Z 1
                                 Z(t) − Z(t̂)
                 δ(x, x̂) :=                  dp    when x 6= x̂
                              0     x − x̂
and                                       Z 1
                                                   Z ′ (t)
                             δ(x, x) :=                    dp .
                                             0    −G′ (t)


Proof
P        of Proposition
                           3.3. Fix a coupling of hK and hK̂ that minimizes
   v∈VD ∩V̂D E |hK (v) − hK̂ (v)| . Standard continuity and compactness
                                                             
                                                                         argu-
                                                                             
ments show that there is such a coupling. Set f (v) := E |hK (v) − hK̂ (v)|
for vertices v ∈ (VD ∪ V∂ ) ∩ (V̂D ∪ V̂∂ ).
    First, we claim that f is discrete subharmonic on vertices in BR r U.
Indeed, fix a vertex w ∈ BR r U. The conditional distribution of hK (w)
given the value of hK at every vertex but w is that of x + A X, where x is
the average of hK on the neighbors √    of w, X is a standard Gaussian, and A
is the lattice-dependent constant 1/ 6 (since each vertex has six neighbors
in T G). Similarly, hK̂ (w) = x̂ + AX̂. By the choice of coupling, when we fix
the values of hK and hK̂ off of w, the corresponding conditioned coupling of
hK (w) and hK̂ (w) minimizes the conditioned expectation of |hK (w) − hK̂ (w)|.
But one such    conditioned
                              coupling is obtained by taking X = X̂. Thus,
f (w) ≤ E |x − x̂| , which implies that f is subharmonic at w, since
                X                                X                X
                      |hK (u) − hK̂ (u)| ≥             hK (u) −         hK̂ (u) ,   (3.11)
                u∼w                              u∼w              u∼w

where the sums are over the neighbors of w.
   Next, consider any vertex v ∈ V+ ∩ BR . As before, we may write hK (v) =
x + A X, where x is the average of hK on the neighbors of v and X is a

                                             35
random variable whose conditional law given x is that of a standard Gaussian
conditional on x + A X > 0. Lemma 3.4 applied with x/A instead of x and
x̂/A instead of x̂ implies that f is also subharmonic at v. We claim that
there is a constant b = b(Λ̄, ǫ) > 0 such that

                          ∆f (v) ≥ b ,           if f (v) ≥ ǫ/2 ,                  (3.12)

where ∆ denotes the discrete Laplacian on T G. Indeed, the optimality of
the coupling gives
                                       
              E |hK (v) − hK̂ (v)| x, x̂ ≤ δ(x/A, x̂/A) |x − x̂| ,

where δ(·, ·) < 1 is as in the lemma. Thus,
                                                       
                         f (v) ≤ E δ(x/A, x̂/A) |x − x̂| .

By (3.11) with v in place of w we have
                                  h                        i
     ∆f (v) ≥ E |x − x̂| − f (v) ≥ E 1 − δ(x/A, x̂/A) |x − x̂| .                   (3.13)

                                                                   2
                                                                    
For every neighbor 2  u of v we have by (3.5) E hK (u) < OΛ̄ (1). It easily
follows that E x < OΛ̄ (1). Hence,      Cauchy-Schwarz
                                                                  implies that there is a
constant
         b0 (ǫ, Λ̄) >  0 such that E   |x|  1 A    < ǫ/8   for every   event
                                                                              A satisfying
                                                                                  
P A < b0 . There is a constant b1 = b1 (ǫ, Λ̄) such that P |x| > b1 < b0 /2.
The same inequalities will hold with x̂ and hK̂ in place of x and hK . Therefore,
                                                                          
          E |x − x̂| = E |x − x̂| 1|x|∨|x̂|≤b1 + E |x − x̂| 1|x|∨|x̂|>b1
                                                                              
                         ≤ E |x − x̂| 1|x|∨|x̂|≤b1 + E (|x| + |x̂|) 1|x|∨|x̂|>b1
                                                   
                         ≤ E |x − x̂| 1|x|∨|x̂|≤b1 + ǫ/4 .
                                                                     
Thus,
      if we  assume   that f (v) ≥ ǫ/2,  then     also E   |x − x̂|   ≥ ǫ/2 and therefore
E |x − x̂| 1|x|∨|x̂|≤b1 ≥ ǫ/4. Therefore, (3.13) gives (3.12) with

               b := (ǫ/4) min{1 − δ(x/A, x̂/A) : x, x̂ ∈ [−b1 , b1 ]}.

Clearly, f is also discrete-subharmonic on V− ∩ BR and (3.12) also holds for
v ∈ V− ∩ BR and (trivially) for v ∈ V∂ ∩ BR .
   Next, we prove that for all vertices w ∈ BR we have
                                            p
                             f (w) ≤ OΛ̄ (1) log R .                  (3.14)

                                            36
Fix such a w, and assume that w ∈      / U. We may decompose hK (w) as a sum
hK (w) = y + Y , where y is the value at w of the discrete harmonic extension
of the restriction of hK to U, and Y is a centered Gaussian whose variance is
1/6 times the expected number of visits to w by a simple random walk started
at w that is stopped when it hits U. A simple random walk on T G started at
w has probability at least a positive constant times 1/ log R to reach distance
R from w before returning to w, and once it does reach this distance it has
probability bounded awayfrom        zero to hit 0 before returning
                                                                to w.  √ Since
                                  2
0 ∈ U, it follows that E Y            = O(log R). Thus, E |Y | = O( log R).
Since y is the average of the value of hK on U with respect to harmonic
measure
            w, it√ follows from (3.2) that E |y| = OΛ̄ (1). Thus, we have
          from
E |hK (w)| ≤ OΛ̄ ( log R). This certainly also holds if w ∈ U, and     a similar
                                                                               
estimate
          holds
                   for hK̂ (w). Now  (3.14) follows, since f (w) ≤ E  |hK (w)| +
E |hK̂ (w)| .
     We now show that the established properties of f imply that f ≤ ǫ on
B1/ǫ if R is sufficiently large. Fix some vertex w ∈ B1/ǫ , and let St be a
simple random walk on T G started at w. Let t1 be the first time t such
that |St | > R/2 or St = 0. Since f is discrete-subharmonic on VD ∩ BR ,
t 7→ f (St∧t1 ) is a submartingale.
                                     The optional sampling theorem
                                                                   implies that
                                                                               
f (w) ≤ E f (St1 ) . By standard random walk estimates, P |St1 | > R/2 ≤
O(1) | log ǫ|/ log R. (We assume, with no loss of generality, that ǫ < 1/2, say.)
Consequently,
                                  | log ǫ|
  f (w) ≤ E f (St1 ) ≤ f (0) + O(1)          max{f (u) : u ∈ VD ∩ BR }
                                     log R
                                                                      | log ǫ|
                                                    ≤ f (0) + OΛ̄ (1) √        .
                                                                         log R
This proves that f (w) ≤ ǫ if f (0) ≤ ǫ/2 and R is sufficiently large.
    Now assume that f (0) ≥ ǫ/2. Let S̃t be a simple random walk starting at
0. Let t∗ := min{t : |S̃t | > R/2} and let ns be the number of t ∈ {0, . . . , s−1}
such that S̃t = 0. By (3.12) and our assumption that f (0) ≥ ǫ/2, f (S̃t∧t∗ ) −
b nt∧t∗ is a submartingale. Thus,
                                                                         
  0 ≤ f (0) ≤ E f (S̃t∗ ) − b E nt∗ ≤ max{f (u) : u ∈ VD ∩ BR } − b E nt∗
                                                           p                
                                                  ≤ OΛ̄ (1) log R − b E nt∗ .
                                                 
Now note that as R → ∞ while ǫ is fixed E nt∗ grows at least as fast as a
positive constant times log R, because the probability for S̃t not to return to 0

                                        37
after any specific visit to 0 is bounded by O(1/ log R). Thus, the above rules
out the possibility that f (0) ≥ ǫ/2 if R is sufficiently large. This completes
the proof.
    As a corollary of the proposition, we now show that the correlation in the
values of h at two vertices in U decays as the distance between them tends
to infinity.
Corollary 3.5 (Correlation decay). For every ǫ > 0 there is some R =
R(ǫ, Λ̄) such that the following holds. Let D, VD , V∂ , h∂ , V+ , V− , U and K
be as in Lemma 3.1, and let v1 , v2 ∈ U satisfy |v1 − v2 | > R. Then
                                                        
             E h(v1 ) h(v2 ) K − E h(v1 ) K E h(v2 ) K < ǫ .

Proof. Suppose, without loss of generality, that v2 ∈ V+ . Fix some a > 0
and let X := 1{0<h(v2 )≤a} . We may apply Proposition 3.3 to our present setup
and to the setup where the value of h(v2 ) is fixed at some constant y ∈ (0, a]
and v2 ∈ ∂D. Thus, the proposition would apply, provided that Λ̄ is replaced
by Λ̄ ∨ a. Consequently, we find that there is an R′ = R′ (ǫ, Λ̄, a) such that if
|v1 − v2 | > R′ , then
                                               
                 E h(v1 ) h(v2 ), K − E h(v1 ) K X ≤ ǫ/(2a) .

Since h(v2 ) X ≤ a, X 2 = X and h(v2 ) X is h(v2 ) measurable, this gives
                                              
  ǫ/2 ≥ E h(v1 ) h(v2 ), K h(v2 ) X − E h(v1 ) K h(v2 ) X
                                                        
                 = E h(v1 ) h(v2 ) X h(v2 ), K − E h(v1 ) K h(v2 ) X .

Taking expectations conditioned on K now gives
                                             
     E h(v1 ) h(v2 ) X K − E h(v1 ) K E h(v2 ) X K ≤ ǫ/2 .                    (3.15)

Since
               (1 − X) h(v2 )2 ≤ (1 − X) |h(v2 )|3 /a ≤ 6 e|h(v2 )| /a
and h(v1 )2 ≤ 2 e|h(v1 )| , if c denotes the constant satisfying (3.1), then Cauchy-
Schwarz gives
                                  2
  E h(v1 ) h(v2 ) (1 − X) K ≤ E h(v1 )2 K E h(v2 )2 (1 − X) K
                                                                         

                                                                    ≤ (2 c) (6 c/a) .

                                         38
Similarly,
             0 ≤ E |h(v2 )| (1 − X) K ≤ E 2 e|h(v2 )| /a K ≤ 2 c/a .
                                                       

Consequently, if a is chosen sufficiently large then
                                            
  E h(v1 ) h(v2 ) X K − E h(v1 ) h(v2 ) K
                                                                 
                                       = E h(v1 ) h(v2 ) (1 − X) K < ǫ/4
and
                                              
      E h(v1 ) K E h(v2 ) X K − E h(v1 ) K E h(v2 ) K < ǫ/4 .

The corollary now follows from (3.15).
   Next, we provide a simple lemma which bounds the amount in which
adding a function to h affects its distribution.
Lemma 3.6 (DGFF distortion). Assume (h). Let f : VD ∪ V∂ → R satisfy
f = 0 on V∂ . Let µ be the law of h, and let µf be the law of h̃ := h + f . Then
for every event A,
                       µf [A] ≤ exp k∇f k2 /2 µ[A]1/2 .
                                              

Proof. Suppose that X is a standard Gaussian in Rn , y ∈ Rn is some fixed
vector, and A ⊂ Rn is measurable. Then
                      Z
  P X + y ∈ A = cn 1A exp(−kx − yk2/2)
                

                                 Z
                             = cn 1A exp(x · y − kyk2/2) exp(−kxk2 /2) ,

where c−1       exp(−kxk2 /2) and the integrals are with respect to Lebesgue
             R
        n =
              n
measure in R . (This is the Cameron-Martin formula.) We may think of
the right hand side as the inner product of 1A and exp(x · y − kyk2/2) with
respect to the Gaussian measure. Hence, Cauchy-Schwarz gives
                             1/2                     1/2
                                 E exp(2 X · y − kyk2)
                   
  P X +y ∈A ≤P X ∈A
                                                         1/2
                                                              exp(kyk2/2) .
                                                  
                                             =P X∈A
   Let h̄ denote the discrete harmonic extension of h∂ . Then h − h̄ is the
DGFF with zero boundary values, and hence is a standard Gaussian on RVD
with respect to the norm g 7→ k∇gk2. The lemma follows.


                                       39
3.2    Near independence
In this subsection we build on the infrastructure developed above to prove
that under appropriate assumptions the shape of an interface inside a ball
does not depend too strongly on the shape of an interface outside a slightly
larger ball. More precisely, we have:
Proposition 3.7 (Near independence). Let C > 1 and let R > 103 C. As-
sume (h) and B5R ⊂ D. Let R1 , R2 , R3 ∈ [R, 5R] satisfy R1 + C −1 R < R2 ,
R2 + C −1 R < R3 and R3 + C −1 R < 5R. Let V+3 , V−3 be disjoint sets of ver-
tices in D r BR3 and let V+1 , V−1 be disjoint sets of vertices in BR1 . Suppose
that every vertex of V+1 neighbors with a vertex in V−1 , every vertex of V−1
neighbors with a vertex in V+1 , and similarly for V−3 and V+3 . Also suppose
that a random walk started at 0 has probability at least 1/C to hit V−3 ∪ V+3
before exiting B5R . Let K1 be the event that h > 0 on V+1 and that h < 0 on
V−1 , and let K3 be the corresponding event for V−3 and V+3 . Let a(V+1 , V−1 ) be
the probability of K1 for the DGFF on BR2 with zero boundary values outside
BR2 . Then there is a constant c = c(Λ̄, C) > 0, such that
                   c−1 a(V+1 , V−1 ) ≤ P K1 K3 ≤ c a(V+1 , V−1 ) .
                                             

Proof. For j = 0, 1, 2, . . . , 6, 7, 8 set rj = R1 + j (R2 − R1 )/8. Then r8 = R2
and rj+1 ≥ rj + C −1 R/8. We will use the notations W j := (VD ∪ V∂ ) ∩ Brj =
VD ∩ Brj , Wj := (VD ∪ V∂ ) r W j and Wji := Wj ∩ W i . Let h̃ denote the
harmonic extension of the restriction of h to W 1 ∪ W7 . We may identify h̃
                   1
with a point in RW ∪W7 ; namely, its restriction to W 1 ∪W7 . As we have noted
after (2.4) the probability density of h̃ with respect to Lebesgue measure on
    1
RW ∪W7 is proportional to exp(−k∇h̃k2 /2). Hence,
                                                              2
                                        R                          
                                               exp −k∇   h̃k    /2
                   P K1 K3 = KR1 ∩K3
                                 
                                                                  ,         (3.16)
                                              exp −k∇  h̃k 2 /2
                                           K3
                                                                        1
where the integrals are with respect to Lebesgue measure on RW ∪W7 . Let
h1 be the function that agrees with h on W 1 , is harmonic on W17 , and is zero
in W7 . Let h3 be the function that agrees with h on W7 , is harmonic on W17 ,
and is zero in W 1 . Clearly, h̃ = h1 + h3 .
   We claim that
  Z           k∇h̃k2  Z                  k∇h k2      k∇h k2 
                                                1                3
          exp −            ≍           exp −         exp −            , (3.17)
   K1 ∩K3            2          K1 ∩K3        2                2

                                        40
where ≍ means equivalence up to multiplicative constants depending on Λ̄
and C. Let V+ := V+1 ∪V+3 and V− := V−1 ∪V−3 . Fix some v ∈ W26 . Let h̄ denote
the harmonic extension of the restriction of h to V+ ∪ V− . Then h(v) − h̃(v)
and h̃(v) − h̄(v) are independent Gaussian random variables, and both are
independent of h̄ (by the orthogonality property noted in §2.1). By (2.5),
the variance of h(v) − h̃(v) is 1/6 times the expected number of visits to v by
a random walk started at v, which is stopped when it hits W 1 ∪ W7 , and the
variance of h(v) − h̄(v) is 1/6 times the expected number of visits to v by the
same random walk stopped when it hits V+ ∪ V− . Consequently, the variance
of h̃(v)− h̄(v) is 1/6 times the expected number of visits to v after the first hit
of W 1 ∪ W7 and before the first hit of V+ ∪ V− . Note that the probability to
hit v by a random walk started in W 1 ∪ W7 before exiting B5R is O(1/ log R)
and conditioned on hitting v before exiting B5R the number of visits to v
prior to exiting B5R is O(log R). Our assumption on the probability to hit
                                                        2 
V−3 ∪ V+3 therefore easily implies that E h̃(v) − h̄(v)
                                           
                                                             = OC (1) and hence
                 
E |h̃(v) − h̄(v)| = OC (1). Since K1 ∩K3 is determined by h̄, it is independent
                                                             
of h̃(v) − h̄(v), and consequently E |h̃(v) − h̄(v)| K1 , K3 = OC (1). Now,
by (3.4), we have E |h̄(v)| K1 , K3 = OΛ̄ (1). Combining these estimates,
                          
we get E |h̃(v)| K1 , K3 = OC,Λ̄ (1).
     We will now apply the argument used to prove (3.4) in order to establish
                    h                               i
                  E max |h̃(v)| : v ∈ W35
                         
                                             K1 , K3 = OC,Λ̄ (1).           (3.18)

Indeed, let A denote the set of vertices in W26 neighboring with some ver-
tex outside W26 , and let H(v, u) denote the probability that simple random
walk started at v first hits A in u. As in the proof of (3.4), H(v, u) ≤
OC (1) H(v ′, u) for v, v ′ ∈ W35 . Now (3.18) follows as in the proof of (3.4).
     Next, we want to show that (3.18) holds with h1 and h3 replacing h̃; that
is,
                              E[M | K1 , K3 ] = OC,Λ̄ (1) ,                 (3.19)
where M := max |hj (v)| : v ∈ W35 , j = 1, 3 . Let v1 be the vertex v ∈
                    

W35 where |h1 (v)| is maximized, and let v3 be the vertex v ∈ W35 where
|h3 (v)| is maximized. Then M = max{|h1 (v1 )|, |h3 (v3 )|}. Assume, for now,
that M = |h3 (v3 )|. The maximum principle for discrete harmonic functions
implies that v3 neighbors with a vertex outside Br5 and v1 neighbors with
a vertex in Br3 . Let p be the probability that simple random walk started
at v3 exits BR3 before hitting a vertex neighboring with a vertex in Br3 .

                                        41
Then p is bounded away from 0 by a function of C. Since h1 composed
with a simple random walk is a martingale while the walk stays in W17 , we
get |h1 (v3 )| ≤ (1 − p) |h1 (v1 )| ≤ (1 − p) M. Since h̃ = h1 + h3 , we get,
|h̃(v3 )| ≥ |h3 (v3 )| − |h1 (v3 )| = M − |h1 (v3 )| ≥ p M. The case M = |h1 (v1 )| is
similarly treated. Using (3.18), we then get (3.19).
     Next, we want to prove

                                     |∇h1 · ∇h3 | = O(M 2 ) .                   (3.20)

Since h1 is harmonic in W17 , if v ∈ W17 ,
                       X                    
                             h1 (v) − h1 (u) h3 (v) = 0,
                               u∼v

where the sum is over the neighbors of v. This is also true for v ∈ W 1 , since
h3 is zero there. Consequently,
                      X X                     
                               h1 (v) − h1 (u) h3 (v) = 0.               (3.21)
                             v∈W 4 u∼v

Similarly, we find,
                             XX                         
                                         h3 (u) − h3 (v) h1 (u) = 0.            (3.22)
                             u∈W4 v∼u


Set ∂W 4 := {(v, u) ∈ W 4 × W4 : u ∼ v}. By considering the contribution
of each edge [v, u] to ∇h1 · ∇h3 , we compare the sum of the left hand sides
of (3.21) and (3.22) to ∇h1 · ∇h3 and conclude that
                      X                                   
     ∇h1 · ∇h3 =             h3 (v) h1 (u) − h1 (v) h3(u)
                        (v,u)∈∂W 4
             X                                                              (3.23)
       =                    h1 (u) − h1 (v) h3 (u) + h3 (v) − h3 (u) h1 (u) .
           (v,u)∈∂W 4


The number of summands is clearly O(R). Note that for every v ∈ W 4
neighboring with a vertex u ∈ W4 , there is a disk of radius proportional
to R/C such that all the vertices in that disk are in W35 . Consequently,
the Discrete Harnack Principle 2.2 gives h1 (u) − h1 (v) = O(M/R) and
 h3 (u) − h3 (v) = O(M/R). Hence, (3.23) gives (3.20).


                                                42
   Now, (3.19) implies that the expectation of |∇h1 · ∇h3 |1/2 conditioned
on K1 ∩ K3 is bounded by a function of C and Λ̄. In particular, there is a
constant c1 = c1 (Λ̄, C) > 0 such that
                    P |∇h1 · ∇h3 | < c1 K1 , K3 > (c1 )−1 .
                                              

In terms of Lebesgue measure, this may be written as
      Z            −k∇h̃k2       Z            −k∇h̃k2 
              exp             < c1         exp             1{|∇h1·∇h3 |<c1 } .
       K1 ∩K3         2             K1 ∩K3         2
Since h̃ = h1 + h3 , this implies
     Z             −k∇h̃k2            Z           k∇h k2 + k∇h k2 
                                     c1                 1        3
              exp              < c1 e           exp −                  ,
       K1 ∩K3          2                 K1 ∩K3             2
which gives one side of (3.17).
    The other direction is proved in essentially the same way.      Under the
                                                     2          2
probability measure weighted by exp −(k∇h1 k + k∇h3 k )/2 (with respect
                                1
to Lebesgue measure on RW ∪W7 ), h1 restricted to W 1 has the law of the
DGFF with zero boundary values on W7 restricted to W 1 . Similarly, with this
weighting, h3 restricted to W7 has the law of the DGFF with zero boundary
values on W 1 and with boundary values given by h∂ on ∂D, restricted to
W7 . Moreover, under this measure h1 and h3 are clearly independent. The
above arguments show that under this measure (3.19) holds (where K1 refers
to h1 while K3 refers to h3 ). Since (3.20) is still valid, the opposite inequality
in (3.17) is then easily established.
    We may also apply (3.17) in the case where V+1 = V−1 = ∅, and hence K1
has full measure. Since
   Z            k∇h k2         k∇h k2 
                       1                 3
            exp −           exp −
     K1 ∩K3          2                 2
                         Z             k∇h k2  Z                  k∇h k2 
                                                1                            3
                      =        1K1 exp −                    1K3 exp −           ,
                          RW 1                2         RW7                2
from (3.16) we get,
                                                2
                                R                    
                                    exp −k∇h1 k   /2
                      P K1 K3 ≍ RK1
                            
                                                    ,
                                   exp −k∇h1 k2 /2
which completes the proof.


                                         43
3.3    Narrows and obstacles
The present subsection and the next will use the infrastructure developed
in §3.1 to prove some bounds on the probabilities that contour lines cross
certain regions in specified ways. This is roughly in the spirit of the Russo-
Seymour-Welsh theorem for percolation, though the proofs are entirely dif-
ferent.
    The following lemma is an estimate for having a crossing by T G∗ -hexagons
where h is negative between two arcs on the boundary of some subset of the
domain, conditioned on some zero height interface paths. The statement
below is slightly complicated, because we need to keep the geometric as-
sumptions quite general. In percolation, boundary values do not play a role,
of course. But in our case we need the crossing estimate in the case where
one boundary arc of the domain is conditioned to be an interface.
Lemma 3.8 (Narrows). For every ǫ > 0 there is a δ = δ(Λ̄, ǫ) > 0 such
that the following crossing estimate holds. Assume (h) and (D). Let K be
the event that a fixed collection {γ1 , . . . , γk } of oriented paths in T G∗ are
contained in oriented zero height interfaces of h, and suppose that P[K] > 0.
Let α ⊂ D r (γ1 ∪ · · · ∪ γk ) be a simple path that has both its endpoints on
the right hand side (positive side) of γ1 . Let A be the domain bounded by α
and a subarc of γ1 , and assume that A does not meet the left side of γ1 and
A ∩ (γ2 ∪ γ3 ∪ · · · ∪ γk ∪ ∂D) = ∅. Let α1 , α2 , α′ be three disjoint subarcs of
α, where α1 contains one endpoint of α and α2 contains the other endpoint
of α. (See Figure 3.1.) Suppose that each point in α′ is contained in a T G∗ -
hexagon whose center is outside A. Set d1 := supz∈α′ dist(z, γ1 ). Let C be the
event that there is a path crossing from α1 to α2 in A inside hexagons where
h is negative. Let d∗ be the infimum diameter of any path connecting α′ to
γ1 ∪ · · · γk ∪ ∂D which does not contain a sub-path connecting α r (α1 ∪ α2 )
to γ1 in A. If
            d1 + 1 ≤ δ min d∗ , dist(α1 , α′ ), dist(α2 , α′ ), diam α′ ,
                          
                                                                             (3.24)
then                                 
                                 P C K < ǫ.
    The idea of the proof is to observe the effect that such a crossing would
have on certain averages of heights of vertices, and thereby conclude that it is
unlikely. The challenge in the implementation of this strategy is to condition
on a crossing in such a way that would make the expected heights easy to
estimate.

                                        44
                                       α2



                                            α′

                            A

                                                 α1
                                         γ1


                   Figure 3.1: Setup in the narrows lemma.

Proof. Set N := ⌊diam α′ /2⌋. Assume that (3.24) holds. Note that
diam γ1 ≥ diam α′ − 2 d1. Choose some point z0 ∈ α′. For j = 1, 2, . . . , N
let zj be a point in α′ at distance j from z0 . Now for each zj we let sj
be some center of a hexagon that contains zj satisfying sj ∈        / A. Then
|sj − si | ≥ |j − i| − O(1). Let U be the union of V∂ and the set of ver-
tices adjacent to any one of the paths γ1 , . . . , γk . (These are precisely the
vertices v where h takes boundary values or the sign of h(v) is determined
by K.) Set
                                      XN
                            X := N −1     h(sj ) ,
                                          j=1

b := E X K and fix some ǫ′ > 0. We first claim that
         


                       E (X − b)2 K < ǫ′
                                      
                                                                            (3.25)

if δ = δ(ǫ′ , Λ̄) > 0 is sufficiently small. Let hU denotePthe harmonic extension
of the restriction of h to U and set XU := N −1 N           j=1 hU (sj ). Note that
                                                  
E X − XU K, hU = 0, and hence E XU K = b. For each u ∈ U and
j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N} let p(j, u) denote the probability that simple
                                                                PN random walk
                                                             −1
started from sj first hits U at u. Also set p(u) := N             j=1 p(j, u). Then




                                        45
       P
XU =     u∈U p(u) h(u). Consequently,


  E (XU − b)2 K
               
         X
                      ′
                         
                                   ′
                                                    ′
                                                            
      =       p(u) p(u ) E h(u) h(u ) K − E h(u) K E h(u ) K .
           u,u′ ∈U


Let Z(u, u′) denote the termin parentheses corresponding to the summand
involving u and u′ . Then E (XU − b)2 K is just the average of the con-
ditioned
        covariances   Z(u, u′) weighted by p(u) p(u′). We know from (3.1)
that E h(u)2 K is bounded by a constant depending only on Λ̄. It then
                   
                                                                    ′
follows by Cauchy-Schwarz     that
                                  the same is true for Z(u, u ). Consequently,
to prove that E (XU − b) K is small, it suffices to show that when (u, u′)
                           2
                 

is chosen with probability p(u) p(u′) it is very likely that |Z(u, u′)| is small.
Suppose that we select j from {1, 2, . . . , N} uniformly at random and given
j select u ∈ U with probability p(j, u). Independently, we also select (j ′ , u′ )
with the same distribution. It suffices to show that |Z(u, u′)| is likely to be
small, and by Corollary 3.5 it suffices to show that the distance between u
and u′ is likely to be large. Since |sj − sj ′ | = |j − j ′ | + O(1) is unlikely to be
much smaller than diam α′ , which is larger than δ −1 (d1 + 1), it follows from
Lemma Hit Near 2.1 that for any fixed R the probability that |u − u′ | < R
tends to zero as δ → 0. Consequently,

                           E (XU − b)2 K < ǫ′ /2 ,
                                               

provided that δ is sufficiently small.
   Set Xj := h(sj ) − hU (sj ). Recall from §2.1 that given the restriction of h
to U the function h − hU is the DGFF on VD r U with zero boundary values
on U. By (2.5), therefore E Xi Xj K, hU = G(si , sj )/6, where G(v, u) is
the expected number of visits to u by a random walker started at v and
stopped when it hits U. From Lemma Hit Near 2.1 and Lemma 2.3
                       (
                        O(1) log(d1 /(|si − sj | ∨ 1)) |si − sj | < d1 /2,
         G(si , sj ) ≤                            ζ1
                        O(1) d1 /(|si − sj | ∨ 1)      |si − sj | ≥ d1 /2.

Since |sj − si | ≥ |j − i| − O(1) and ζ1 ∈ (0, 1), these estimates give
                              N
                              X
                    2      −2
                                G(sj , si )/6 = O(1) (d1/N)ζ1 .
                     
         E (X − XU ) K = N
                                       i,j=1


                                         46
Now (3.25) follows for sufficiently small δ = δ(ǫ′ , Λ̄) > 0, since X − XU is
independent from XU and they are also independent given K.
    We now claim that b ≥ 0 if δ is sufficiently small. Let c be the constant
given
   by Lemma
                 3.1. If u is a fixed vertex adjacent to γ1 on the
                                                                  right, then
E h(u) K > 1/c, by (3.2). On the other hand, E |h(u)| K < c for every
u ∈ U. By (3.24) and Lemma Hit Near 2.1 it follows that when δ is small
with high probability a random walk starting at any sj is likely to first hit
U at a vertex adjacent to the right hand side of γ1 . Thus, when δ is small,
we have b = E XU K > 0. Also, clearly, b ≤ c.
    Now set a = b + 1. Let Q denote the union of the closed hexagons in T G∗
for which h(H) ∈ [0, a] and let Q′ denote the union of the edges in T G∗ that
are on the common boundary of two hexagons H1 and H2 satisfying h(H1 ) <
0, a < h(H2 ). Let Q0 denote the connected component of (Q ∪ Q′ ) ∩ A that
contains γ1 ∩ ∂A. Let Q denote the event Q0 ∩ α r (α1 ∪ α2 ) = ∅. If C holds,
then the corresponding crossing by hexagons where h is negative separates
γ1 ∩ ∂A from α r (α1 ∪ α2 ) in A, and hence Q holds as well. Thus, C ⊂ Q.
     On the event Q, let A′ be the connected component of A r Q0 that
contains α′ , and let UQ denote the set of centers of hexagons H such that
H ∩ A′ ∩Q0 6= ∅. Clearly, h(v) < 0 or h(v) > a for each v ∈ UQ . Since A′ and
Q0 are connected, it is immediate to verify (using the Jordan planar curve
theorem) that A′ is simply connected and ∂A′ r ∂A ⊂ Q0 is connected. The
closed hexagons of T G∗ with centers in UQ form a sequence (possibly with
repetitions) with each pair H, H ′ of consecutive hexagons along the sequence
satisfying H ∩H ′ rQ0 6= ∅ and H ∩H ′ ∩Q0 6= ∅. (See Figure 3.2.) If v, u ∈ UQ
are centers of consecutive hexagons in this sequence, then it is impossible that
h(v) < 0 and h(u) > a (otherwise, the boundary between the hexagons would
be in Q′ ). Thus, either h(UQ ) ⊂ (a, ∞), or h(UQ ) ⊂ (−∞, 0). Let Q+ be
the event that Q occurs and min h(UQ ) > a, and let Q− be the event that Q
occurs and max h(UQ ) < 0.
     We now want to estimate E X K, Q− and E X K, Q+ . Let U ′ be
                                                                

the set of vertices that are either in hexagons adjacent to Q0 or in U. Since
a = OΛ̄ (1), it is clear that the proof of (3.2) gives E |h(u)| K, U ′ , Q± =
                                                                             

OΛ̄ (1) for u ∈ U ′ . On the other hand, Lemma Hit Near 2.1 shows that at
least 1 − O(δ ζ1 ) of the discrete harmonic measure
                                                    on U ′ starting from every
sj is in UQ . If Q− holds and u ∈ UQ , then E h(u) K, Q− , UQ is negative
and bounded away from zero, by the corresponding
                                                       analog of the left hand
side of (3.2). Thus, we find that E X K, Q− is negative and bounded away

                                      47
                                             12

                                                   11       10

                                   Q0                            9

                                        5                   8

                                            4, 6        7        A′

                        1      2        3


 Figure 3.2: A portion of the sequence of hexagons adjacent to ∂A′ r ∂A.

from zero when δ = δ(ǫ′ , Λ̄) > 0 is small. Since E (X − b)2 K < ǫ′ and
                                                               
                                        ′
b≥ 0, we conclude that by choosing ǫ > 0 small it can be guaranteed that
P Q− K < ǫ/2.
    On Q+ , we clearly have h(u) > a ≥ b + 1 on every
                                                       u ∈ UQ . Thus, as
above, it follows
                that when
                            δ is small E X K, Q+ > b + 1/2. This again
implies that P Q+ K can be made smaller than ǫ/2. Since C ⊂ Q+ ∪ Q− ,
this completes the proof.
    Next, we formulate an analogous lemma for crossings near the boundary
of the domain.

Lemma 3.9 (Domain boundary narrows). There is a constant Λ0 = Λ0 (Λ̄) >
0 such that for every ǫ > 0 there is a δ = δ(Λ̄, ǫ) > 0 such that the following
crossing estimate holds. Assume (h) and (D), assume that ∂+ is a simple
path contained in ∂D and that h∂ ≥ −Λ0 on ∂+ ∩ V∂ . Set ∂− := ∂D r ∂+ .
Let K be the event that a fixed collection {γ1 , . . . , γk } of oriented paths in
T G∗ are contained in oriented zero height interfaces of h, and suppose that
P[K] > 0. Let α ⊂ D r (γ1 ∪ · · · ∪ γk ) be a simple path that has both its
endpoints on ∂+ . Let A be the domain bounded by α and a subarc of ∂+ , and
assume that A ∩ (γ1 ∪ γ2 ∪ · · · ∪ γk ∪ ∂− ) = ∅. Let α′ ⊂ α be a subarc. Suppose
that each point in α′ is contained in a hexagon whose center is outside A.
Set d1 := supz∈α′ dist(z, ∂+ ). Let α1 be a subarc of α that contains one of the
endpoints of α, and let α2 be a subarc of α that contains the other endpoint of

                                            48
α. Let C be the event that there is a path crossing from α1 to α2 in A inside
hexagons where h is negative. Let d∗ be the infimum diameter of any path
connecting α′ to γ1 ∪· · · γk ∪∂D which does not contain a sub-path connecting
α r (α1 ∪ α2 ) to ∂+ in A. If
        d1 + 1 ≤ δ min d∗ , dist(α1 , α′ ), dist(α2 , α′ ), diam α′ ,
                           
                                                                        (3.26)
then                                   
                                   P C K < ǫ.
Proof. The proof is slightly simpler but essentially the same as the proof
of the Narrows Lemma 3.8. We use the same notations as in that lemma,
and only
       indicate
                   the few differences in the proof. In the present setting
b = E X K can be made larger than −2 Λ0 by taking δ > 0 small. Here,
we define Q0 as the connected component of (Q ∪ Q′ ∪ ∂+ ) ∩ A that con-
   ∂+ ∩ ∂A.
tains          Observe that UQ ∩ ∂D = ∅ on Q− ∩ K. It follows that
E X K, Q− is negative and bounded away from zero (by a function of Λ̄)
when δ > 0 is small.
                    By taking Λ0 > 0 sufficiently   small,
                                                         we can make sure
                                                   2
                                           
that E X K, Q− < −3 Λ0 . But    since E (X − b) K is arbitrarily small
and b ≥ −2 Λ0 , this makes P Q− K small. The rest of the argument is
essentially the same.
    The previous lemmas will help us control the behavior of the continuation
of contours near existing contours or the boundary of the domain. The next
lemma will help us control the behavior in the interior away from existing
contours.
Lemma 3.10 (Obstacle). For every ǫ > 0 there is some constant c =
c(ǫ, Λ̄) > 0 such that the following estimate holds. Assume (h) and (D).
Let K be the event that a fixed collection {γ1 , . . . , γk } of oriented paths in
T G∗ are contained in oriented zero height interfaces of h, and suppose that
P[K] > 0. Let U be the union of V∂ and the vertices of T G adjacent to
γ̄ := γ1 ∪ γ2 ∪ · · · ∪ γk . Let g be a function defined on the vertices of T G that
is 0 on U. Let γ̂g denote the union of the interfaces of h + g that contain
any one of the paths γ1 , γ2 , . . . , γk . Let B(z0 , r) be a disk of radius r that is
centered at some vertex z0 satisfying |g(z0)| ≥ kgk∞ /2. Let d > 0 and sup-
pose that at distance at most ǫ−1 d from z0 there is a connected component of
γ̄ ∪ ∂D whose diameter is at least ǫ d. Also assume kgk∞ /k∇gk∞ > c r > c.
Then
                    P γ̂g ∩ B(z0 , r) 6= ∅ K ≤ c log(d/r) kgk−2
                                              
                                                                   ∞.


                                          49
Proof. With no loss of generality, we assume that g(z0 ) > 0. Set q :=
kgk∞/k∇gk∞ and r1 := q/10. Since between any two vertices z, z ′ in T G
there is a path in T G whose length is at most 2 |z − z ′ |,

min{g(z) : z ∈ B(z0 , r1 )} ≥ g(z0 ) − 2 r1 k∇gk∞ = g(z0 ) − kgk∞ /5 ≥ kgk∞/4 .

Since g = 0 on U, it follows that ǫ−1 d ≥ r1 . Since we are assuming that
q > c r, and we may assume that c is a large constant which may depend
on ǫ, it follows that d/r√> 100, say. Thus, we also assume, with no loss of
generality, that kgk∞ ≥ c, since the required inequality is trivial otherwise.
   Let X denote the average value of h on the vertices in B(z0 , r). The
inequality (3.5) and d/r > 100 give

                        E X 2 K ≤ Oǫ,Λ̄ (1) log(d/r) .
                                
                                                                        (3.27)

    If γ1 is not a closed path, we start exploring the interface of h + g con-
taining γ1 starting from one of the endpoints of γ1 until that interface is
completed or B(z0 , r) is hit, whichever occurs first. (This may entail going
through several of the interfaces γj , j > 1.) If that interface is completed
before we hit B(z0 , r), we continue and explore the interface of h + g con-
taining γ2 , and so forth, until finally either all of γ̂g is explored or B(z0 , r) is
hit. Let Q denote the event that B(z0 , r) is hit, and let β be the interfaces
explored up to the time when the exploration terminates.
    Let U ′ be the union of U with the vertices
                                             √       adjacent to β. Since we are
assuming q > c r, r > 1 and kgk∞ ≥ c, and since c may be chosen an
arbitrarily large constant, Lemma 3.2 shows that for every vertex v ∈ U ′ , we
have                 h                          i
                   E |h(v) + g(v)| K, Q, β ≤ kgk∞ /100 .                     (3.28)

(Note that conditioning on Q and β amounts to conditioning that h + g > 0
on vertices adjacent to the right hand side of β and h + g < 0 on vertices
adjacent to the left hand side. Consequently, the lemma applies.)
     Now let x be any vertex in B(z0 , r). For each u ∈ U ′ , let pu denote the
probability that simple random walk started at x will first hit U ′ in u; that
is, the discrete harmonic measure from x. Then (3.28) gives
                    h            i kgk
                                       ∞
                                           X
                   E h(x) K, Q, β ≤      −    pu g(u) .                        (3.29)
                                    100     ′        u∈U




                                         50
Since β ∩ B(z0 , r) 6= ∅ and β intersects the complement of B(z0 , r1 ), Lemma
Hit Near 2.1 gives           X
                                     pu ≤ O(1) (r/r1)ζ1 .
                        u∈U ′ rB(z0 ,r1 )

Since we are assuming that q ≥ c r, we may assume that the right hand side
is less than 1/10. Recall that g ≥ kgk∞/4 inside B(z0 , r1 ). Outside B(z0 , r1 ),
the trivial estimate g ≥ −kgk∞ applies. When these estimates are applied
to (3.29), one gets,
     h               i kgk
                            ∞
                                        X                       X
   E h(x) K, Q, β −            ≤−              pu g(u) −              pu g(u)
                          100         ′                       ′
                                            u∈U ∩B(z0 ,r1 )   u∈U rB(z0 ,r1 )

                           ≤ −(kgk∞ /4)(1 − 1/10) + kgk∞ /10 = −kgk∞ /8 .
We may take expectation
                       with respect to β and average with respect to x to
conclude that E X K, Q ≤ −kgk∞ /9, which implies by Jensen’s inequality
                       E X 2 K, Q ≥ kgk2∞ /81 .
                                   

Since
                    P Q K ≤ E X 2 K /E X 2 Q, K ,
                                          

the lemma now follows from the above and (3.27).


3.4     Barriers
In this subsection we apply Lemmas 3.8, 3.10 and 3.6 to get a flexible (though
slightly complicated) criterion giving lower bounds for the probability that
contours avoid certain sets. The complications arise from the need to handle
pre-existing contours that are highly non-smooth on large scales.
     The following relative notion of distance will sometimes be used below:
                          
     dist(A, B; X) := inf diam α : α is a path in X connecting A and B .
                                                                            (3.30)
If γ̄ is a collection of paths in D, let D(γ̄) denote the complement in D of
the union of the closed triangles of T G meeting γ̄.
     We now define the notion of a barrier. Assume (h). Let γ1 , γ2, . . . , γk be
disjoint simple paths or simple closed paths in D. Set γ̄ := γ1 ∪ · · · ∪ γk . Let
Υ ⊂ D(γ̄) be a path, which is contained in D(γ̄), except possibly for its two
endpoints. Fix some R > 0 and ǫ > 0. We call Υ an (ǫ, R)-barrier for the
configuration (D, γ̄) if the following conditions hold:

                                               51
                       γ2        Az
                                            γ1



                                      z            Υ

                                            χz



Figure 3.3: The domain Az in a situation where condition 3 fails. (The
figure does not show detail on the scale of the lattice; that is, D(γ̄) appears
as D r γ̄.)

  1. ǫ R < diam Υ ≤ R,
  2. within distance ǫ−1 R from Υ there is a connected component of γ̄ ∪∂D
     whose diameter is at least ǫR,
  3. if z ∈ ∂D(γ̄) is an endpoint of Υ and χz is the connected component of
     ∂B(z, ǫ R) ∩ D(γ̄) first encountered when traversing Υ from z (which
     exists by 1), then the connected component Az of D(γ̄) r χz that con-
     tains points of Υ arbitrarily close to z satisfies (a) ∂Az consists of χz
     and a simple path contained in ∂D(γ̄) and (b) Υ∩Az ∩∂B(z, r) consists
     of a single point for every r ∈ (0, ǫ R).
  4. for every point w ∈ Υ such that dist(w, ∂D(γ̄)) ≤ ǫ R/5 there is an
     endpoint z ∈ Υ∩∂D(γ̄) such that w ∈ Az and |w −z| < ǫ R/2 (roughly,
     Υ does not get close to ∂D(γ̄) except near its endpoints on ∂D(γ̄)).
   One example where condition 3 fails is given in Figure 3.3. If we remove
the strand of γ2 from that figure, we get an example that illustrates that
Az ⊂ B(z, ǫ R) does not follow from the above conditions. Note that it may
happen that ∂Az r χz , which is a simple path, by 3, consists of an arc in ∂D
together with one or two arcs in γ̄ that have endpoints in ∂D.
   We now use barriers to “manipulate” contours of the DGFF.

                                      52
Theorem 3.11 (Barriers). For every ǫ > 0, m ∈ N+ and Λ̄ > 0 there is
a p = p(ǫ, Λ̄, m) > 0 such that the following estimate holds. Assume (h)
and (D). Let K be the event that a fixed collection {γ1 , . . . , γk } of oriented
paths in T G∗ is contained in theS oriented zero height interfaces of h, and
suppose that P[K] > 0. Set γ̄ := kj=1 γj . Let V+ [respectively, V− ] be the set
of vertices adjacent to γ̄ on the right [respectively, left] hand side. Let R > 0
and let Y = Y+ ∪ Y− be a collection of m (ǫ, R)-barriers for the configuration
(D, γ̄). Assume that the endpoints of these barriers are not on ∂D and that
for every Υ ∈ Y+ [respectively, Υ ∈ Y− ] and every endpoint z ∈ Υ ∩ ∂D(γ̄),
the vertices in Az (Υ) ∩ ∂D(γ̄) are in V+ [respectively, V− ], where Az (Υ) is
as in Condition 3. Also assume that dist ∪Y+ , ∪Y− ; D(γ̄) ≥ 2 ǫ R. In the
situation where ǫ R = O(1), we also need to assume that there is no hexagon
in T G∗ meeting both V+ ∪ (∪Y+ ) and V− ∪ (∪Y− ) and there is no hexagon
meeting ∪Y and ∂D. Let γ̂ denote the union of the zero height interfaces of
h which contain any one of the arcs γ1 , . . . , γk . Then
                                                     
                       P (γ̂ r γ̄) ∩ (∪Y ) = ∅ K > p .

    The basic idea of the proof is as follows. We define a function g that
is large (positive) near ∪Y+ away from ∂D(γ̄) and is negative and large
in absolute value near ∪Y− away from ∂D(γ̄). The Obstacle Lemma 3.10
will then imply that γ̂g , as defined there, is unlikely to hit Υ, except near
endpoints of barriers. The Narrows Lemma 3.8 will be used to show that γ̂g
is also unlikely to hit ∪Y near endpoints. Finally, the Distortion Lemma 3.6
will be used to conclude that with probability bounded away from zero, γ̂
will not hit Υ.
Proof. Let
                       [
             Â1+ :=        Az (Υ) ∩ B(z, ǫ R) : Υ ∈ Y+ , z ∈ Υ ∩ γ̄ ,

Â2+ := z ∈ D(γ̄) : dist z, ∪Y+ ; D(γ̄) ≤ ǫ R/10 , and Â+ := Â1+ ∪ Â2+ .
                                       

Similarly define Â− , with Y− replacing Y+ . We fix constants c0 > 0, large,
and δ > 0 much smaller than ǫ, and set
               
                      −1 −1                   2
               c0 δ R min{δ R, dist(z, R r Â+ )}
                                                          if z ∈ Â+ ,
                        −1  −1                  2
       g(z) := −c0 δ R min{δ R, dist(z, R r Â− )} if z ∈ Â− ,
               
                 0                                         otherwise.
               


                                          53
Note that Â+ ∩ Â− = ∅ and kgk∞ = c0 .
    Let Z := {z ∈ R2 : |g(z)| = c0 }. Let c1 > 1 be some large constant and set
r := δ R/c1 . Let W be a maximal collection of vertices in {v : |g(v)| ≥ c0 /2}
such that the distance between any two distinct vertices in W is at least r/3,
and for a ∈ W let Ba denote the disk of radius r centered at a. Then the
disks Ba , a ∈ W , cover Z, assuming that r > 1 and c1 > 100, say. Note that

                     |W | = O(m) (R/r)2 = O(m) (c1/δ)2 .

   Fix some a ∈ W . We wish   to invoke Lemma 3.10 to get a good upper
bound on P γ̂g ∩ Ba 6= ∅ K . We now verify the assumptions of the lemma.
We note that in our case kgk∞ = c0 and k∇gk∞ = c0 /(δ R). Thus, q :=
kgk∞/k∇gk∞ = δ R. Consequently, we set c1 to be the maximum of 100 and
twice the constant c in the lemma, and the assumption q > c r is satisfied.
The assumption r > 1 will hold once R is large enough, which we assume for
now (we promise that δ will be a constant depending only on ǫ, m and Λ̄).
For the d in the lemma we may take d = R. Thus, log(d/r) = log(c1 /δ), and
the lemma gives

                 P γ̂g ∩ Ba 6= ∅ K ≤ Oǫ,Λ̄(1) log(c1 /δ) c−2
                                  
                                                           0 .

Since a∈W Ba ⊃ Z and |W | = O(m) (c1 /δ)2 , we conclude that
      S

             P γ̂g ∩ Z 6= ∅ K ≤ Oǫ,Λ̄ (m) log(c1 /δ) (c1 /δ)2 c−2
                              
                                                               0 .

Although we have not specified δ yet, we choose c0 = c0 (c1 , δ, ǫ, m, Λ̄) so that
                                         
                       P γ̂g ∩ Z 6= ∅ K ≤ 1/10 .                            (3.31)

    Now that we have established that it is unlikely that γ̂g intersects Z, we
need to worry about the case in which γ̂g circumvents Z but hits ∪Y r Z.
This can only happen near endpoints of barriers. Let us fix some Υ ∈ Y+
that has an endpoint, say z1 , on ∂D(γ̄). Let χ̃z1 be the arc ∂Az1 (Υ) rχz1 . (It
is an arc, by Condition 3 of the definition of barrier.) We will now prepare
the
   geometric setup that will enable
                                       the use of Lemma 3.8 to prove that
P γ̂g ∩ Az1 (Υ) ∩ Υ r Z 6= ∅ K is small.
    Let Q be the set of all hexagons of the grid T G∗ whose distance from
∂D(γ̄) is at most 2 δ R. Let S be the connected component of

                  Az1 ∩ B(z1 , 7 ǫ R/8) r (Q ∪ B(z1 , 5 ǫ R/8))

                                       54
                                                 S̃
                γ1                                              Υ
                              z1
                     α0
                                            α2
              A                                       S′

                                                           α1


 Figure 3.4: The set S, and the paths α0 and α̃0 . The shaded region is Q.

that intersects Υ. (See Figure 3.4.) Condition 4 in the definition of barri-
ers and our assumption that δ ≪ ǫ guarantees that there is a unique such
component S. We have S ⊂ Z, and so γ̂g is unlikely to hit S.
    Let S ′ and S̃ be the two connected components of S r Υ. Consider the
connected component M1 of ∂B(z1 7 ǫ R/8)r χ̃z1 that intersects Υ. Let α1 be
the arc in M1 r S that has one endpoint in S ′ and the other in χ̃z1 . Likewise,
let M2 be the connected component of ∂B(z1 5 ǫ R/8) r χ̃z1 that intersects
Υ, and let α2 be the arc in M2 r S that has one endpoint in S ′ and the
other in χ̃z1 . Let α denote the union of α1 ∪ α2 with the arc of ∂S ′ r Υ
that connects the endpoint of α1 with the endpoint of α2 . Let A ⊂ Az1 (Υ)
be the domain whose boundary consists of α1 ∪ α2 , an arc of ∂S ′ connecting
α1 and α2 and an arc of χ̃z1 connecting α1 and α2 . Let α0 be the unique
arc of ∂A r ∂B(z1 5 ǫ R/8) ∪ ∂B(z1 7 ǫ R/8) connecting ∂B(z1 5 ǫ R/8) with
∂B(z1 7 ǫ R/8). Finally, let α′ be any sub-arc of α0 whose diameter is ǫ R/16
that intersects the circle ∂B(z1 , 3 ǫ R/4). We use A, α1 , α2 , α′ in Lemma 3.8.
In the present situation, the value of d1 of that lemma is d1 = 2 δ R + O(1).
If we have a path connecting α′ to ∂D ∪ γ̄, it must either exit B(z1 , 7 ǫ R/8) r
B(z1 , 5 ǫ R/8), hit ΥrB(z1 , 5 ǫ R/8) (whose distance from γ̄ is at least ǫ R/5)
or connect α0 to χ̃z1 inside A. Consequently, the minimum on the right hand
side in (3.24) is presently at least ǫ R/16. The lemma now implies that if we
choose our current δ = δ(ǫ, m, Λ̄) > 0 sufficiently small and make sure that



                                       55
                          Ã




                                                S
                           A




                       Figure 3.5: No way to penetrate.

R > 1/δ, then
                               P C K ≤ m−1 /10 ,
                                   

where C is the event that there is a crossing of hexagons satisfying h < 0
between α1 and α2 inside A. If there is no such crossing, then also γ̂g does
not make such a crossing, because g ≥ 0 in A.
                                                     ˜ when we replace S ′ by S̃ in
    Likewise, we may define α̃1 , α̃2 , α̃′ , Ã and C,
the above paragraph. The same argument shows that P C˜ K ≤ m−1 /10.
                                                                   

    Condition 3 of the definition of a barrier implies that S ∪ A ∪ Ã ∪ χz1
separates Υ ∩ Az1 (Υ) from all the endpoints of the strands γ1 , . . . , γk . Con-
sequently, in order for γ̂g to hit Υ ∩ Az1 (Υ), we must have γ̂g ∩ S 6= ∅ or
     ˜ See Figure 3.5 (also compare Figure 3.4). A similar argument applies
C ∪ C.
for every other endpoint of a barrier. Since S ⊂ Z, we conclude
                                                  
                       P γ̂g ∩ (∪Y ) 6= ∅ K ≤ 3/10 .                         (3.32)

    We are really more interested in γ̂ than in γ̂g . To do the translation, we
will appeal to Lemma 3.6. For this purpose, note that

                   k∇gk∞ = O(1) c0 δ −1 R−1 = Oǫ,Λ̄,m (1/R)

and that g is supported in a union of m sets of diameter O(R). Consequently,
k∇gk2 = Oǫ,Λ̄,m (1). Let U be the set of vertices in ∂D(γ̄), and let hU denote
the restriction of h to U. By (3.32), even if we further condition on hU , the

                                        56
left hand side stays bounded away from one on an event whose probability
is bounded away from zero, namely,
               h                                i
             P P γ̂g ∩ (∪Y ) = ∅ K, hU > 1/10 K > 1/10 .

Because g = 0 on U, we may apply Lemma 3.6 and conclude that for hU
such that the inner inequality above holds,
                                                   
                  Oǫ,Λ̄,m (1) P γ̂ ∩ (∪Y ) = ∅ K, hU ≥ 1 .

Since this set of hU has conditioned probability at least 1/10, the theorem
follows.
    It remains to remove the assumption that R is larger than some fixed
constant R0 = R0 (ǫ, m, Λ̄). Assume now that R is bounded. It is not too
hard to see that the event H that h(H) ∈ (0, 1) for every hexagon meeting
∪Y+ and h ∈ (−1, 0) for every hexagon meeting ∪Y− has probability bounded
below by (a rather small) positive constant. This is proved by considering
these O(m R2) hexagons one by one. On the event H, we have γ̂ ∩ (∪Y ) = ∅.
This completes the proof.

Remark 3.12. There is a corresponding analog of the Barriers Theorem 3.11
in the case where the endpoints of the barriers are permitted to land on
∂D. In that case, it is necessary to assume that h∂ ≥ −Λ0 [respectively,
h∂ ≤ Λ0 ] on ∂Az (Υ) ∩ V∂ if Υ ∈ Y+ [respectively, Y− ] and z ∈ ∂D ∩ Υ, where
Λ0 = Λ0 (Λ̄) > 0 is the constant given by Lemma 3.9. We refrain from stating
a complete formulation of this variant, though it will be useful. The proof is
the same, except that Lemma 3.9 is used to deal with the narrows near ∂D,
instead of the Narrows Lemma 3.8.

3.5    Meeting of random walk and interface
We now need to further develop the basic setup and introduce some notations.
If α is a path in the hexagonal grid T G∗ , we let V (α) denote the set of T G-
vertices adjacent to it. If α is an arc of an oriented zero height interface of
h, let V+ (α) denote the vertices adjacent to it on its right hand side, and let
V− (α) denote the vertices adjacent to it on its left hand side.
    In addition to our previous assumptions (h) and (D), we will use the
following setup:


                                      57
 (S) Let γ denote the interface of h from x∂ to y∂ . Let v0 be some vertex
     of T G in D, and let S be a simple random walk on the vertices of T G
     started at v0 that is independent from h. Let τ be the first time t such
     that St ∈ ∂D(γ).
      The point Sτ will play a special role. Essentially, we will be interested in
the configuration “as viewed from Sτ ”; that is, in the coordinate system where
Sτ is translated to 0. In order to eliminate too much additional notation,
it will be convenient to consider the event Sτ = 0 instead. Let τ0 be the
first t such that St = 0, and let S̆ denote the reversed walk S̆t := Sτ0 −t ,
t = 0, 1, 2, . . . , τ0 .                                           
      For σ = 0, 1, . . . , 5, let eσ denote the edge 0, exp(π i σ/3) of the trian-
gular grid T G, and let e∗σ denote the dual edge in T G∗ . Let Z0σ denote the
event Z0σ := {Sτ = 0} ∩ {e∗σ ⊂ γ}.
      Fix some large R. Suppose that BR ⊂ D and v0 ∈       / BR . Let extR γ denote
the union of the components of γ r BR containing x∂ and y∂ . (If γ ∩ BR = ∅,
then extR γ = γ.) If there is an interface of h containing e∗σ , denote it by
β̂ = β̂ σ , and let β = βRσ be the connected component of β̂ ∩ BR that contains
e∗σ . Otherwise, set β = β̂ = ∅. Let intR S̆ denote the part of S̆ up to the first
exit of BR , and let extR S denote the part of S up to the first entry to BR .
      Set ΦR := (D, ∂+ , h∂ , v0 , extR γ, extR S) and ΘR = ΘR (σ) := (βRσ , intR S̆).
Our goal is to show that conditioned on Z0σ , the distribution of β does not
depend strongly on Φ4R . (A precise version of this statement is given in
Corollary 3.16 below.) To this end we will use something like
       h                       i PΘ = ϑ Φ  PZ σ Θ = ϑ, Φ 
                                        R         3R         R         3R
     P ΘR = ϑ Φ3R , Z0 =     σ
                                                    σ 0                 . (3.33)
                                                 P Z0 Φ3R
                                                                                     
This equality is obtained by applying Bayes’ formula to the measure P · Φ3R .
The following lemma takes care of the first factor in the numerator on the
right hand side.
Lemma 3.13. Assume (h), (D) and (S). There is a constant c = c(Λ̄) > 0
and a function pR (·) such that if R > 50, R′ ∈ [5 R/4, 3 R], D ⊃ B4R and
v0 ∈
   / B4R , then for all ϑ = (β̃, S̃) such that β̃ 6= ∅
            c−1 pR (ϑ) ≤ P ΘR = ϑ γ ∩ B4R 6= ∅, ΦR′ ≤ c pR (ϑ) .
                                                      

The function pR may depend on R and ϑ, but not on anything else (in par-
ticular, not on D, v0 , ΦR′ or h∂ ).

                                         58
Proof. The corresponding statement with ΘR replaced by β, the first coor-
dinate of ΘR , is an immediate consequence of Proposition 3.7.
    We assume v0 ∈  / B4R . The configuration ΦR′ determines the first vertex,
say q, inside BR′ visited by the random walk S. The continuation of the walk
is just simple random walk starting at q. Suppose that we had another such
walk starting at a vertex q ′ ∈ BR′ . It is easy to see that with probability
bounded away from zero the walk starting at q visits q ′ before 0. If that
happens, we couple the continuation of the walk to be the same as the walk
which starts at q ′ (otherwise, we let them be independent). On the event
that the walk started at q hits q ′ before 0, the corresponding intR S̆ for both
walks will be the same. This proves the corresponding statement about the
second coordinate of ΘR . Since the two coordinates are independent given
ΦR′ , the lemma follows.
    Proving an analogous result for the second factor in the numerator of the
right hand side of (3.33) will be considerably more difficult. To this end, we
now define a measure of the quality Q = QR of the configurations ΦR and
ΘR .
    If γ ∩ BR 6= ∅, let xR [respectively, y R ] denote the endpoint in ∂BR of
the component of extR γ containing x∂ [respectively, y∂ ]. When v0 ∈ / BR , let
 R
q denote the vertex in BR first visited by S. If γ ∩ BR = ∅ or extR S visits
∂D(extR γ), then set Q(ΦR ) = 0. Otherwise, define

              dist(x, extR S) ∧ dist(y, extR S) ∧ dist(q, extR γ) ∧ |x − y|    1
 Q(ΦR ) :=                                                                  ∧     ,
                                           R                                  100
where x = xR , y = y R and q = q R . This is a measure of the separation
between the strands comprising ΦR . Similarly, define Q(ΘR ), as follows.
Suppose that v0 ∈   / BR ⊂ D and let q̂ R be the first vertex outside of BR
visited by S̆. Fix an orientation of e∗σ . If β̂ 6⊂ BR , let x̂R and ŷ R be the
two endpoints of the component of β = βR containing e∗σ , chosen so that the
orientation of the arc of β from x̂R to ŷ R agrees with that of e∗σ . If β̂ ⊂ BR
or if S̆ visits any vertex in ∂D(βR ) r {0}, then set Q(ΘR ) = 0. Otherwise,
set

                 dist(x̂, intR S̆) ∧ dist(ŷ, intR S̆) ∧ dist(q̂, β) ∧ |x̂ − ŷ|    1
    Q(ΘR ) :=                                                                    ∧     ,
                                                R                                  100
where x̂ = x̂R , ŷ = ŷ R and q̂ = q̂ R .


                                             59
Lemma 3.14 (Compatibility). Assume (h), (D) and (S). For every ǫ > 0
there is a constant c = c(ǫ, Λ̄) > 0 such that

            c−1 1{Q(ΘR )>ǫ} 1{Q(ΦR′ )>ǫ} ≤ P Z0σ ΘR , ΦR′ log R ≤ c
                                                        


holds whenever R > c, 5 R > R′ > 9 R/8 and v0 ∈       / B6R ⊂ D.

Proof. We start by proving the lower bound on P Z0σ ΘR , ΦR′ , which is
                                                                       

the harder estimate. Assume that Q(ΘR ) ∧ Q(ΦR′ ) > ǫ, R > c > 1010 /ǫ,
5 R > R′ > 9 R/8 and v0 ∈         / B6R ⊂ D. Let D̂S denote the connected
component of BR rβR that intersects intR S̆ and let DS denote the connected
component of D r(extR′ γ ∪BR′ ) that contains v0 and therefore extR′ S. Note
that the sign of h on vertices in D̂S adjacent to β is constant, as is the sign of h
on vertices in DS adjacent to extR′ γ. Let D denote the event that these signs
are the same, namely, the sign of h on vertices in V (extR′ γ) ∩ DS is the same
as on vertices in V (βR ) ∩ D̂S. Using symmetry, Proposition 3.7 immediately
implies that P D ΦR′ , ΘR is bounded away from zero. (Although β is
determined by ΘR , its orientation as a subarc of an oriented zero height
interface of h is not determined by ΘR .)
     We now construct some barriers, as illustrated in Figure 3.6. Let a be the
initial point of the arc ∂BR′ ∩ D S , when the arc is oriented counterclockwise
around BR′ , and let b be the other endpoint of this arc. Likewise, let â be the
initial point of the arc ∂BR ∩ D̂ S , when the arc is oriented counterclockwise
around BR , and let b̂ be the other endpoint of this arc. Note that {â, b̂} =
                              ′    ′
{x̂R , ŷ R} and {a, b} = {xR , y R }.
     We now describe a path αa connecting a to â and a path αb connecting b
                                          ′
to b̂ and a path αq connecting q̂ R to q R such that these paths do not come too
                                                                          ′
close to each other. For example, if the arguments arg a, arg b, arg q R , arg â, arg b̂
and arg q̂ R are chosen so that arg â < arg q̂ R < arg b̂ < arg â + 2π, arg a <
arg q R < arg b < arg a + 2π, and | arg a − arg â| ≤ π, then we may take αa to
be defined in polar coordinates by θ = s + t r, with s and t chosen so that a
and â are on the path, and similarly for αb and αq . It is easy to check that
our assumptions guarantee that the distance between any two of these paths
is at least c1 ǫ R for some constant c1 > 0. Set ǫ′ = c1 ǫ/10.
     Let D+ be the connected component of D r (extR′ γ ∪ βR ∪ αa ∪ αb ) that
contains V+ (extR′ γ), and let D− be the other connected component. Let αa′
be the connected component        of {z ∈ D+ : dist(z, αa ) = ǫ′ R} that meets the
circle ∂B 0, (R + R′ )/2 . Note that αa′ is a simple path and intersects the
                           


                                         60
              extR′ γ
                                         BR′

                                Aa
                                     β

                                             BR       Ab
                      intR S̆

                                                                extR′ γ



                                                           extR′ S

                  Figure 3.6: The construction of the barriers.

circle ∂B 0, (R + R′ )/2 at one point. Let a0 denote that point. We want
                          

to construct a pertubation of αa′ , which will be some (ǫ′′ , 12 R)-barrier, with
ǫ′′ not much smaller than ǫ′ . Let a1 be the closest point to a0 along αa′ such
that the distance from a1 to ∂D(extR′ γ) is ǫ′ R/10, and let â1 be the closest
point to a0 along αa′ such that the distance from â1 to ∂D(βR ) is ǫ′ R/10.
        a
Let α+     be the path which is the union of the arc of αa′ connecting a1 and
â1 together with a shortest line segment connecting a1 to ∂D(extR′ γ) and a
shortest line segment connecting â1 to ∂D(βR ).
     We claim that α+a
                       is an (ǫ′′ , 12 R)-barrier for the configuration (D, extR′ γ∪
             ′′   ′
βR ) with ǫ = ǫ /1000. Indeed, Conditions 1, 2, 4 and 3.(b) in the definition
of the barrier clearly hold. To verify Condition 3.(a), let z1 be the endpoint
of α+ a
          on ∂D(extR′ γ), and let z1′ and z1′′ be the two endpoints of χz1 on
∂D(extR′ γ). Consider the simple arc χ̃ connecting z1′ to z1′′ in ∂D(extR′ γ).
By the Jordan curve theorem, χ̃ ∪ χz1 separates the plane into two connected
                       a                                                a
components. Since α+      crosses χz1 it follows that the part of α+        inside BR′
                                                 R ′   R′
is outside of Az1 , and thus the endpoints x , y and also βR are all outside
Az1 . It follows that ∂Az1 = χz1 ∪ χ̃, as required. A similar argument applies
                         a                           a
near the endpoint of α+     on ∂D(βR ). Thus, α+        is indeed an (ǫ′′ , R′ )-barrier.
Note also that the above easily implies that ∂Az1 ⊂ D+ . This will be useful
below when we apply the Barriers Theorem 3.11.

                                           61
                                      a
    We similarly construct a path α−     in D− close to αa . Likewise, we con-
                   b         b
struct barriers α+ and α− near the path αb . The construction is the same,
except that we replace αa by αb .
    On the event D, we may apply the Barriers Theorem 3.11 with Y+ =
   a    b             a    b
{α+  , α+ }, Y− = {α−   , α− }, Y = Y+ ∪ Y− and γ̄ = extR′ γ ∪ βR . (Here we
use the assumption that R > c.) Note that conditioning on ΘR , ΦR′ and
D, amounts to conditioning on K in the theorem and on the behavior of
intR S̆ ∪ extR′ S, which is anyway independent from h. Therefore, there is a
p = p(ǫ, Λ̄) > 0 such that
                                              
                               P Y ΘR , ΦR′ , D ≥ p ,

where Y denotes the event

                         Y := {(γ r γ̄) ∩ (∪Y ) = ∅} .
                                                                 a      a
Let Aa be the connected component of D(extR′ γ ∪ βR ) r (α+        ∪ α−   ) that
                        b
contains αa , and let A be the connected component of D(extR′ γ ∪ βR ) r
  b     b
(α+  ∪ α− ) that contains αb . Again, using the Jordan curve theorem, it is
easy to verify that Aa ∩ Ab = ∅. On the event Y, there is no other choice for
the strand of γ extending extR′ γ at a, but to be confined to Aa until it hooks
up with β at â, since every other exit from Aa is blocked. Consequently, on
Y, we have γ ⊃ β. A similar argument applies to Ab , and we get

                   β ⊂ γ ⊂ extR′ γ ∪ β ∪ Aa ∪ Ab         on Y .

    We now turn to the random walk S. For Z0σ to hold, we must make
sure that {St : t < τ0 } does not meet any vertex neighboring with γ. First
consider extR′ S. Note that extR′ S does not intersect ∂Aa , because ∂Aa is
contained in BR′ ∪B(a, 2 ǫ′ R), and we are assuming that Q(ΦR′ ) > ǫ. (Recall,
              ′      ′
{a, b} = {xR , y R }.) Thus, extR′ S ∩ Aa = ∅, and we may also conclude that
extR′ S does not visit any vertex adjacent to Aa when R is large. Similar
arguments apply to Ab and to intR S̆. Thus, intR S̆ ∪ extR′ S does not visit
any vertex adjacent to γ on the event Y ∩ {Q(ΦR′ ) > ǫ, Q(ΘR ) > ǫ}.
                                                                   ′
    Now let S ∗ be the walk S from the first time it visits q R until the first
time it visits q̂ R . Then, conditioned on ΘR and ΦR′ , S ∗ is just simple random
                       ′
walk started at q R conditioned to hit q̂ R before hitting   0. Let Aq denote the
ǫ′ R-neighborhood of αq . Clearly, dist Aq , Aa ∪ Ab ≥ ǫ′ R. The probability
                                                      

that S ∗ gets within distance ǫ′ R/4 of q̂ R before exiting Aq is at least some

                                       62
(perhaps small) positive constant depending only on ǫ′ (and hence on ǫ).
Conditional on this event, the probability that S ∗ visits q̂ R before exiting Aq
is within a constant multiple of 1/ log(ǫ′ R), by (2.6). Now let S ∗∗ be the walk
S from the first visit of q̂ R to the last visit of q̂ R before time τ0 . Note that
S ∗∗ and intR S̆ are independent given q̂ R . Thus, given ΦR′ , ΘR , D and S ∗ , we
may sample S ∗∗ by starting a random walk from q̂ R , stopping when it hits 0,
and then removing the part of that walk after the last visit to q̂ R . When the
latter walk first gets to distance ǫ′ R/2 from q̂ R , it has probability bounded
away from zero (by a constant depending only on ǫ′ ) to hit 0 before q̂ R . (This
follows, for example, from Lemma 2.2 applied to the function giving for every
vertex the probability to hit 0 before q̂ R for a random walk started at that
vertex.) Thus, conditioned on (S ∗ , ΘR , ΦR′ ), with probability bounded away
from 0, S ∗∗ ⊂ Aq . Since

                          Z0σ ⊃ {S ∗ ∪ S ∗∗ ⊂ Aq } ∩ Y ,

we conclude that

                 Oǫ,Λ̄ (1) P Z0σ ΦR′ , ΘR , D ≥ 1/ log(R) .
                                             

                                           
Above, we have argued that P D ΦR′ , ΘR is bounded away from zero, and
so we conclude that the lower bound estimate in the proposition holds.
    It remains to prove the upper bound. Conditional on γ, intR S̆ and extR′ S,
the probability that S ∗ (as defined in the proof of the lower bound) hits q̂ R
before hitting γ is clearly O(1)/ log R, since the conditional law of S ∗ is that
                               ′
of random walk started at q R and conditioned to hit q̂ R before 0, and the
                                                          ′
probability that ordinary random walk started at q R hits q̂ R before 0 is
bounded away from zero. The upper bound now follows, and the proof is
complete.
    To make the previous lemma useful, we will need to argue that configu-
rations with quality bigger than ǫ are not too rare, in an appropriate sense.
This is achieved by the following lemma.
Lemma 3.15 (Separation). Assume (h), (D) and (S). Let p < 1. There is
some constant c = c(p, Λ̄) > 0 such that if R > 1/c and v0 ∈
                                                           / B6R ⊂ D, then

               P Q(Φ3R ) ∧ Q(Θ2R ) > c ΘR , Φ4R , Z0σ > p,
                                                     
                                                                    (3.34)

provided that P Z0σ ΘR , Φ4R > 0.
                             


                                        63
        extrj S

                                            extrj γ




   Figure 3.7: An example for Qj = 0 6= Q(Φrj ). The set Brj is shaded.

   The proof of this lemma is modeled after Lawler’s Separation Lemma for
Brownian motions from [Law98, Lemma 4.2].
Proof. To keep the notations simple, we start by proving a simpler version
of the lemma, where we also assume that Q(ΘR ) ≥ 1/100, say (and therefore
Q(ΘR ) = 1/100), and we prove

                    P Q(Φ3R ) > c ΘR , Φ4R , Z0σ > p .
                                               
                                                                    (3.35)

We define inductively a random sequence r0 , r1 , . . . as follows. Set r0 := 4 R.
Suppose that rj is defined. Set
                         (
                           Q(Φrj ) if P Z0σ Φrj , ΘR > 0,
                                                        
                   Qj :=
                           0        otherwise,

and rj+1 := (1 − 10 Qj ) rj . Note that Qj = 0 implies P Z0σ Φrj , ΘR = 0.
                                                                           

(An example showing that Qj = 0 6= Q(Φrj ) is possible is given in Figure 3.7.
                                           rj     rj
Such
   σ a situation can only occur when |x − y | = O(1).) Also note that
P Z0 Φrj , ΘR > 0 if and only if there are paths γ∗ and S∗ satisfying the
following: (1) γ∗ is a simple T G∗ -path in D containing β R and extrj γ, (2)
S∗ is a T G-path in D containing extrj S and the reversal of intR S̆ and (3) S∗
does not visit any vertex in ∂D(γ∗ ), except for 0.
    We claim that for every j ∈ N
               h                                                i
             P Qj+1 ≥ (2 Qj ) ∧ (1/100) Φrj , rj > 2 R, ΘR > c0             (3.36)

                                       64
                                          Brj+1



                  ∂Brj



               extrj S
                                      extrj γ


         Figure 3.8: The construction of the barriers giving (3.36).

for some constant c0 = c0 (Λ̄) > 0. Clearly it suffices to prove this in the case
Qj > 0. The gap between ∂Brj and ∂Brj+1 is larger than but comparable
to 5 rj Qj . Note also that because Brj is a union of T G∗ -hexagons, rj Qj ≥
   √
1/ 3. If rj Qj > 20, say, then, we can easily use barriers as in the proof
of the Compatibility Lemma 3.14 (see Figure 3.8) to direct and separate
the two strands of extrj+1 γ r extrj γ and the walk extrj+1 S r extrj S so as to
obtain (3.36).
    Now assume that rj Qj ≤ 20. In this case the discrete structure of the
lattice is “visible”. Let q ′ be the point on ∂Brj crossed by extrj S in its
last step, and let α be a longest arc among the three connected components
of ∂Brj r {q ′ , xrj , y rj }. Suppose first that q ′ is not an endpoint of α. Let
α be oriented counterclockwise around Brj , and let a and b be the initial
and terminal points of α, respectively. Let ηa [respectively ηb ] denote the
connected component of extrj+1 γ r extrj γ that has a [respectively, b] as an
endpoint. Assume that |q ′ − a| < 500 and |q ′ − b| < 500. Consider the event
X that ηa goes as far to the right as possible subject to the conditions that it
remains inside B(q ′ , 550) and avoids extrj γ and that ηb goes as far to the left
                                                                        ′
as possible subject to the conditions that it remains inside     σ B(q , 550)
                                                                              and
avoids extrj γ. See Figure 3.9. It is easy to see that P Z0 Φrj , ΘR > 0
implies that on X there is a simple T G-path in B(q ′ , 250) from q ′ to Brj+1
that avoids ∂D(extrj+1 γ). Since the number of edges traversed by these
paths is bounded, it is easy to see that the probability that S follows the
latter path and X holds given Φrj and ΘR satisfying the above assumptions

                                       65
            ∂Brj+1

                                                  ηa
                            ηb
             ∂Brj                        S




                   Figure 3.9: The interfaces spreading out.

is bounded away from zero (for X , note that we can extend the interfaces one
step at a time and the probability for every specific step given the previous
ones is bounded away from zero). This gives (3.36) in this case. Similar, or
simpler, arguments apply if one or more of the assumptions |q ′ − a| < 500
and |q ′ − b| < 500 does not hold.
    If q ′ is an endpoint of α a similar argument may be used. Suppose, for
example, that q ′ is the initial point of α, that y rj is the other endpoint of
α and that |q ′ − y rj | < 300. Then we may consider the possibility that the
connected component of extrj+1 γ r extrj γ that has y rj as an endpoint goes
as far to the left as possible subject to the requirements that it stays inside
B(y rj , 5000) and avoids hexagons containing vertices visited by extrj S, and
that the connected component of extrj+1 γ rextrj γ that has xrj as an endpoint
goes as far to the left as possible subject to the requirements that it stays
inside B(xrj , 4000) and avoids the previous strand extending extrj γ at y rj and
finally, the random walk avoids ∂D(extrj+1 γ) and stays in B(q ′ , 300) until it
hits Brj+1 . A similar argument applies if |q ′ − y rj | ≥ 300. This proves (3.36).
    We now prove for every j ∈ N
                                                              
                P Qj+2 = 0 Φrj , rj > 2 R, ΘR, Qj+1 < 2 Qj ≥ c1 ,            (3.37)

for some c1 = c1 (Λ̄) > 0. Let x = xrj+1 , y = y rj+1 and q = q rj+1 . Let S †
be the part of the walk S from the first visit to q rj up to the first visit to q.
Note that dist(x, extrj S) ≥ 2 rj Qj > 2 rj+1 Qj , if Qj > 0, and similarly for


                                        66
y. Thus, the event Qj+1 < 2 Qj is the union of the following five events
             M0 := {Qj+1 = 0},
             M1 := dist(S † , {x, y}) < (2 Qj rj+1 ) ∧ |x − y| ,
                   
                   
             M2 := rj+1 Qj+1 = dist(q, extrj+1 γ), Qj+1 < 2 Qj ,
             M3 := {0 < |x − y| = rj+1 Qj+1 , Qj+1 < 2 Qj },
             M4 := {Qj+1 = 1/100, Qj+1 < 2 Qj }.
(In the definition of M1 , dist(S † , {x, y}) means the least distance from a
vertex visited by S † to x or y, of course.) Clearly,
                                                     
                    OΛ̄ (1) P Qj+2 = 0 Φrj , ΘR , Mi ≥ 1                (3.38)
holds for i = 0. The same is also true for i = 4, because Qj+1 = 1/100 implies
that the random walk started at q has conditional probability bounded away
from zero to hit extrj+1 γ before ∂Brj+2 . A similar argument gives (3.38)
when i = 2.
    Now condition on M1 , and let v be the vertex first visited by S † that is at
distance less than (2 Qj rj+1 ) ∧ |x − y| from {x, y}. Conditioned additionally
on ΘR , extrj+1 γ and the walk S † until it hits v, there is clearly probability
bounded away from zero that S † hits a vertex adjacent to extrj+1 γ before
Brj+2 , and in this case we have Qj+2 = 0. Consequently, (3.38) also holds
for i = 1.
    Now condition on M3 , Φrj+1 and ΘR . Let z be the midpoint of the seg-
ment [x, y], and consider the circle ∂B(z, 2 |x − y|). We may build a barrier
by using the connected component of ∂B(z, 2 |x − y|) r ∂D(extrj+1 γ) that
intersects Brj+1 (and possibly perturbing it slightly near its endpoints). If γ
does not cross this barrier, then Qj+2 = 0 holds. Thus, we get from the Bar-
riers Theorem 3.11 that (3.38) also holds for i = 3. Since {Qj+1 < 2 Qj } =
S 4
  i=0 Mi , and (3.38) holds for i = 0, 1, . . . , 4, it follows that (3.37) holds as
well.               Qn−1
    Set sn := 2 R k=0    (1 − 2−k /10)−1 . It follows from the Compatibility
Lemma 3.14 and our assumption that Q(ΘR ) ≥ 1/100 that for any j ∈ N
                                        c2
                 P Z0σ Φrj , ΘR ≥
                                 
                                             1{Qj ≥1/100} 1{rj ≥s0 } ,
                                      log R
for some c2 = c2 (Λ̄) > 0. An appeal to (3.36) therefore implies
                                   c0 c2
               P Z0σ Φrj , ΘR ≥
                              
                                         1{Qj ≥2−1 /100} 1{rj ≥s1 } .
                                  log R

                                        67
Continuing inductively, we get for every n ∈ N
                                cn c2
               P Z0σ Φrj , ΘR ≥ 0
                            
                                      1{Qj ≥2−n /100} 1{rj ≥sn } .
                               log R
Since                                  ∞
                                      X
                                              −k
                                                       5
                   sup sn < 2 R/ 1 −          2 /10 =     R,
                     n
                                        k=0
                                                        2
we get for every j ∈ N
                                                   − log c
     σ          c0− log2 Qj c2                  Qj 2 0
   P Z0 Φrj , ΘR ≥               1{rj ≥ 5 R} = c2          1   5    .     (3.39)
                      log R             2          log R {rj ≥ 2 R}

    From (3.37) we get that for every j the conditional probability that there
is some k > j such that rk > 2 R, Qk < 2 Qj and Qk+1 > 0 given Φrj and ΘR
is at most 1 − c1 . Let mn denote the number of k ∈ N such
                                                         that rk > 3 R and
        −n 1−n
                                                                           
Qk ∈ (2 , 2 ]. Fix some n ∈ N, and suppose that P mn > 0 Φ4R , ΘR >
0. On the event mn > 0, let kn be the first k such that Qk ∈ (2−n , 21−n ]. By
induction and (3.37) for every m ∈ N

                 P mn > 2 m mn > 0, Φrkn , ΘR ≤ (1 − c1 )m .
                                               


An appeal to the upper bound in the Compatibility Lemma 3.14 gives

       P Z0σ , mn > 2 m mn > 0, Φrkn , ΘR ≤ c3 (1 − c1 )m / log R.
                                        


for some c3 = c3 (Λ̄). On the other hand, (3.39) gives

                   P Z0σ mn > 0, Φrkn , ΘR ≥ c2 cn0 / log R .
                                          


Comparing the last two inequalities, we get

           P mn > 2 m Z0σ , Φr0 , ΘR ≤ c3 c−n          m
                                      
                                            0 (1 − c1 ) /c2 .

In particular, there is an n0 = n0 (Λ̄, p) ∈ N and a c4 = c4 (Λ̄) such that

             P ∃n ≥ n0 : mn > c4 n Z0σ , Φr0 , ΘR ≤ (1 − p)/3 .
                                                   


                                                 that ∞                  1−n c4 n
                                                      Q
Let n1 be the least integer larger than 3 such          n=n1 (1 − 10 · 2    ) >
                                            σ
                                               T
7/8, and let n2 = n1 ∨n0 . On the event Z0 ∩ n>n2 {mn ≤ c4 n} we must have

                                       68
some j ∈ N with rj > 7 R/2 and Qj ≥ 2−n2 (because rj+1 /rj = 1 − 10 Qj
and n2 ≥ n1 ). Consequently,

     P ∃j : Qj > c5 , rj > 7 R/2 Z0σ , Φ4R , ΘR ≥ 1 − (1 − p)/3
                                              
                                                                (3.40)

holds for some c5 = c5 (p, Λ̄) > 0. Note that this almost achieves our goal of
proving (3.35). The difference between (3.40) and (3.35) is that in the latter
the radius r at which Q(Φr ) is bounded from below is variable.
   Set A be the event that there is a j ∈ N with Qj > c5 and rj > 7 R/2,
and on A, let j0 denote the first such j. We have from (3.39) that
                                              − log c
                  P Z0σ A, Φrj0 , ΘR ≥ c2 c5 2 0 / log R .
                                     
                                                                        (3.41)

Fix some s > 0 small. We now argue that

        P Z0σ A, Φrj0 , ΘR , |x3R − y 3R | < s R ≤ c7 sc6 / log R
                                               
                                                                        (3.42)

for some positive constants c7 and c6 depending only on Λ̄. The argument is
similar to the one given in the proof of the case i = 3 in (3.38). Let z be the
midpoint of the segment [x3R , y 3R]. We construct a barrier as a perturbation
of the connected component of ∂B(z, 2 s R) r ∂D(ext3R γ) that intersects
B3R . If that barrier is hit by the extension of ext3R γ (which happens with
probability bounded away from 1), then we condition on the extension up
to that barrier, and construct another barrier at radius 4 s R, instead. We
continue in this manner, constructing barriers at radii 2n s R up to the least
n such that 2n s > 1/1000, say. Because the probability of avoiding the n’th
barrier given that the (n− 1)’th barrier has been breached is bounded    away
from one, we find that P γ ⊃ βR A, Φrj0 , ΘR , |x3R − y 3R | < s R is bounded
                                                                     

by a constant times some positive power of s. The estimate (3.42) follows by
considering the behavior of S.
    Suppose now that the random walk S after its first hit to Brj0 but before
its first hit to B3R gets within distance s R of ext3R γ. Then by Lemma Hit
Near 2.1, conditional on S up to the first time this has happened and on A,
Φrj0 , ΘR and ext3R γ, the conditional probability for S hitting B5 R/2 before
hitting ∂D(ext3R γ) is at most c8 sζ1 , for some universal constant c8 . Thus,
the conditional probability for Z0σ is at most c8 sζ1 / log R. Combining this
with (3.42), one gets

           P Z0σ A, Φrj0 , ΘR , Q(Φ3R ) < s ≤ (c7 sc6 + c8 sζ1 )/ log R .
                                          


                                      69
Comparison with (3.41) now gives

                                  P Q(Φ3R ) < s, Z0σ A, Φrj0 , ΘR
                                                                      
                 σ
   
  P Q(Φ3R ) < s Z0 , A, Φrj0 , ΘR =                           
                                           P Z0σ A, Φrj0 , ΘR
                      P Z0σ A, Φrj0 , ΘR , Q(Φ3R ) < s
                                                      
                                                           c7 sc6 + c8 sζ1
                   ≤             σ                     ≤       − log c
                                                                           .
                               P Z0 A, Φrj0 , ΘR             c2 c5 2 0

Thus, we obtain for all s sufficiently small

              P Q(Φ3R ) < s Z0σ , A, Φ4R , ΘR ≤ (1 − p)/3 .
                                            

Taking (3.40) into account, this gives (3.35), and completes the proof of the
simplified case.
    The argument in the general case proceeds as follows. We define induc-
tively two sequences rj and r̂j , starting with r0 = 4 R and r̂0 = R. At each
step j, we set

                    Qj := Q(Φrj ) ∧ Q(Θr̂j ) ∧ 1{P[Z0σ |Φrj ,Θr̂j ]>0}

and take rj+1 = (1 − 10 Qj ) rj and r̂j+1 = (1 + 10 Qj ) r̂j . The proof proceeds
essentially as above. The straightforward details are left to the reader.

Corollary 3.16. There is a constant c = c(Λ̄) > 0 such that the following
estimate holds. Let (D ′ , ∂+
                            ′    ′
                              , ∂− , h′∂ , h′ , γ ′ , v0′ ) satisfy the same assumptions as
we have for (D, ∂+ , ∂− , h∂ , h, γ, v0 ). Let R > c, and assume that B6R ⊂
                     / B6R . Let Θ′R , Φ′4R and Z0σ ′ be the objects corresponding
D ′ ∩ D and v0 , v0′ ∈
to ΘR , Φ4R and Z0σ for the system in D ′ (with the same σ, that is, σ ′ = σ).
Then
               P ΘR = ϑ Z0σ , Φ4R ≤ c P Θ′R = ϑ Z0σ ′ , Φ′4R
                                                                          
                                                                                     (3.43)
                ϑ and for every Φ4R and Φ′4R satisfying P Z0σ Φ4R > 0 and
                                                                                 
holds
   σ for every
P Z0 ′ Φ′4R > 0, respectively. Consequently, under the same assumptions,
             

there exists a coupling of the conditional laws of ΘR and Θ′R such that

                     P ΘR = Θ′R Z0σ , Z0σ ′ , Φ4R , Φ′4R ≥ 1/c .
                                                                 

Proof. It is enough to prove the first claim, since the latter claim imme-
diately follows. Let c′ > 0 be the constant denoted as c in the Separation
Lemma 3.15 with p = 1/2. Let Q denote the event Q(Φ3R ) ∧ Q(Θ2R ) ≥ c′ .

                                            70
Let X be the collection of all θ such that Θ2R = θ is possible and Q(θ) ≥ c′ ,
and let Xϑ be the collection of all θ ∈ X that are compatible with ΘR = ϑ;
that is, such that {Θ2R = θ and ΘR = ϑ} is possible. In the following, f ≈ g
will mean that f /g is contained in [1/c, c] for some constant c = c(Λ̄) > 0.
By Lemma 3.15 and the choice of p,

  P ΘR = ϑ Z0σ , Φ4R ≈ P ΘR = ϑ Q, Z0σ , Φ4R
                                          
                                 X 
                                    P Θ2R = θ Q, Z0σ , Φ4R (3.44)
                                                          
                               =
                                        θ∈Xϑ

Now if Q(Φ3R ) > c′ and θ ∈ X, then

                         P Θ2R = θ, Q, Z0σ Φ3R
                                                   
                   σ
  
 P Θ2R = θ Q, Z0 , Φ3R =                       
                                  P Z0σ , Q Φ3R
        P Θ2R = θ, Z0σ Φ3R        P Θ2R = θ Φ3R P Z0σ Θ2R = θ, Φ3R
                                                              
     =                        =                                  .
           P Z0σ , Q Φ3R                     P Z0σ , Q Φ3R

We apply Lemma 3.13 to the first factor in the numerator and Lemma 3.14
to the second factor, and get
                                         p2R (θ)/ log R
                P Θ2R = θ Q, Z0σ , Φ3R ≈  σ
                                     
                                                        .
                                        P Z0 , Q Φ3R

The sum of the left hand side over all θ ∈ X is 1. Consequently,
                                             p2R (θ0 )
                 P Θ2R = θ0 Q, Z0σ , Φ3R ≈ P
                                       
                                                        .
                                            θ∈X p2R (θ)

By taking expectation conditioned on Q, Z0σ and Φ4R , it follows that the
same relation holds when we replace Φ3R by Φ4R . We now sum over θ0 ∈ Xϑ
and invoke (3.44), to obtain
                                         P
                                            θ∈X p2R (θ)
                  P ΘR = ϑ Z0σ , Φ4R ≈ P ϑ
                                    
                                                         .
                                             θ∈X p2R (θ)

This implies (3.43), and completes the proof.
   Our intermediate goal to show that the dependence between the local
behavior near Sτ and the global behavior far away is now accomplished.
Roughly, the next objective will be to show that it is unlikely that γ contains

                                      71
an arc with a very large diameter whose endpoints are both relatively close
to Sτ .
   For R > r > 0 let J = J (r, R) denote the event that there are more
than 2 disjoint arcs of γ connecting Br andS∂BR or that S exits BR between
the time it first hits Br and τ0 . Set Z0 := 5σ=0 Z0σ . Our next objective is to
show that conditioned on Z0σ or Z0 , J (r, R) is unlikely if R ≫ r > 0. More
precisely, the claim is as follows.

Lemma 3.17. Assume (h), (D) and (S). For every p > 0 there is some

    σ
               10 such that if r > 1, R > a r, v0 ∈
a = a(p, Λ̄) >                                    / B4R ⊂ D and
P Z0 ΦR , Θr > 0, then
                       h                      i
                                            σ
                      P J (r, R) ΦR , Θr , Z0 < p

and also                    h                i
                           P J (r, R) ΦR , Z0 < p .

    One may first think that this can be proved by repeating the argument
in the proof of the Compatibility Lemma 3.14. The difficulty in carrying out
this idea is that the sets Aa and Ab described in the proof of Lemma 3.14
may extend beyond BsR′ for large s (where R′ is as in that lemma) if there
are more than two disjoint arcs of extR′ γ connecting ∂BR′ +ǫ′ R and ∂BsR′ .
    Since the proof of the lemma is a bit involved and somewhat indirect, we
take a few moments to give an overview of the strategy. First, it is established
that under the conditioning the simple random walk S is unlikely to backtrack
to ∂BR after hitting Br and before τ0 . Next, we identify a pair of arcs α1
and α2 that are defined from Φ3r each of which has one endpoint on ext3r S
and the other on ext3r γ. A barriers argument is then used to show that
with high conditional probability γ r ext3r γ does not hit α1 ∪ α2 . In this
case, we see that α1 ∪ α2 have an alternative definition in terms of γ and
S, which is in some sense more symmetric. Next we define another pair of
arcs α̃1 ∪ α̃2 , which have a similar definition as α1 ∪ α2 , except that they are
defined from ΘR/3 . Again, the same barriers argument can be used to show
that with high conditional probability these arcs are not visited by γ r βR/3 .
In this case, these arcs have a more symmetric definition, which leads us to
conclude that with high conditional probability α1 ∪ α2 = α̃1 ∪ α̃2 . This is
then used to establish that the endpoints of these arcs on γ belong to ext3r γ
as well as βR/3 . Next, we prove that these two endpoints belong to different

                                       72
connected components of γ r e∗σ . This then implies that each of the two
strands of ext3r γ merges with βR/3 , which implies that there are no more
than two disjoint crossings between ∂BR and B3r in γ.
Proof. The second claimed inequality with p replaced by 6p follows        S5 from
the first inequality and taking conditional expectation, since Z0 = σ=0 Z0σ .
Thus, we only need to prove the first. By the Separation Lemma 3.15, there
is a constant c0 = c0 (Λ̄, p) > 0 such that

    P Q(Φ3R/4 ) ∧ Q(ΘR/2 ) ∧ Q(Φ3r ) ∧ Q(Θ2r ) ≤ c0 ΦR , Θr , Z0σ < p/10 .
                                                                     

                                    √                                         (3.45)
    Let r ′ be in the range    r R, r R+1 , chosen so that the circle ∂B(0, r ′ )
                            √                

does not contain any T G vertices nor T G∗ vertices. Let S∗ denote the part
of the walk S from its first visit to q 3r until its last visit to q̂ r prior to τ0 .
Conditional on Φ3r and Θr , the probability that S∗ exits Br′ /3 without hitting
ext3r γ decays to zero as a → ∞ (by Lemma 2.1). On the event that this
happens, let S∗∗ be the initial segment of the walk S∗ until it exits Br′ /3 . By
the proof of the upper bound in the Compatibility Lemma 3.14,

                 P Z0σ Θ2r , Φ3r , S∗ 6⊂ Br′ /3 , S∗∗ ≤ O(1)/ log r .
                                                    

By the lower bound in that lemma, on the event Q(Φ3r ) ∧ Q(Θ2r ) ≥ c0 we
have
                  Op,Λ̄ (1) P Z0σ Θ2r , Φ3r ≥ 1/ log r .
                                          

Consequently, a may be chosen sufficiently large so that

         1{Q(Φ3r )∧Q(Θ2r )≥c0 } P S∗ 6⊂ Br′ /3 Θ2r , Φ3r , Z0σ < p/10 .
                                                             

Hence, (3.45) implies

                       P S∗ 6⊂ Br′ /3 Θr , ΦR , Z0σ < p/5 .
                                                  
                                                                              (3.46)

    Let S ′ be the path traced by ext3r S from the last time in which ext3r S was
outside BR/3 until its terminal point q 3r ∈ B3r . Let S̃ be the path traced by
intR/3 S̆ from the last time in which intR/3 S̆ was inside B3r until its terminal
point q̂ R/3 . Observe that S ′ is Φ3r -measurable, S̃ is ΘR/3 -measurable, and
when S∗ ⊂ Br′ /3 , we have S ′ = S̃ as unoriented paths.
    Observe that there is a connected component α of ∂B(0, r ′ ) r S ′ such
that S ′ ∪ α separates ∂D from B3r . We fix such an α, and if there is more
than one possible choice, we choose one in a way which depends only on S ′ .

                                         73
   On the event Q(Φ3r ) > 0 each strand of ext3r γ connects ∂D with B3r ,
and hence ext3r γ intersects α. Thus, there are precisely two connected com-
ponents of α ∩ D(ext3r γ) which have one endpoint in S ′ and the other in
∂D(ext3r γ). Let α1 and α2 be these two arcs.
   We now argue that

            1{Q(3r)∧Q(2r)≥c0 } P γ ∩ α1 6= ∅ Z0σ , Φ3r , Θ2r < p/10
                                                           
                                                                       (3.47)

if a is sufficiently large.
    The basic idea of the proof of (3.47) is to construct a sequence of bar-
riers separating B3r from α1 in D(ext3r γ) such that if γ hits a barrier in
the sequence, the conditional probability that it will hit the next barrier is
bounded away from 1.
    Let D ′ be the connected component of D(ext3r γ) r B3r that contains
α1 . Note that D ′ is a simply connected domain. See Figure 3.10. Let zα1
denote the endpoint of α1 on ∂D ′and let ξ1 and ξ2 be the two connected
components of ∂D ′ r {zα1 } ∪ B3r . (Both have zα1 as an endpoint and the
other endpoint in ∂B3r .) Note that any path in D ′ r α1 connecting ξ1 and
ξ2 separates α1 from ∂B3r in D(ext3r γ). For each ρ ∈ (3 r + 3, r ′ − 3) let
A(ρ) denote the connected component of D ′ r B(0, ρ) that contains α1 , and
let α(ρ) denote the connected component of ∂A(ρ) ∩ ∂B(0, ρ) that separates
α1 from B3r in D ′ . Observe that α(ρ) has one endpoint on ξ1 and the other
on ξ2 . If 3 r + 3 < ρ < ρ′ < r ′ − 3, then A(ρ) ⊃ A(ρ′ ) and therefore α(ρ′ )
separates α(ρ) from α1 in D(ext3r γ) and α(ρ) separates α(ρ′ ) from B3r .
When 3 r + 3 < ρ < ρ′ < r ′ − 3, let A(ρ, ρ′ ) denote the connected component
of D ′ r (α(ρ) ∪ α(ρ′ )) whose boundary contains α(ρ) ∪ α(ρ′ ).
    For n ∈ N, let ρn := 2n (3 r + 3), and let N be the largest n such that
8 ρn < r ′ . Fix some n ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N} and some    small δ > 0 (δ = 1/100
should do). Set Aδn := A (1 − δ) ρn , (1 + δ) ρn . By continuity, Aδn contains
                                                   

points w such that dist(w, ξ1) = dist(w, ξ2). Set
                        
          η(n) := min dist(w, ξ1) : w ∈ Aδn , dist(w, ξ1) = dist(w, ξ2) .

First, assume that η(n) > δ ρn . In that case, a barrier Υn is defined as
follows. By continuity, there is a subarc Υ′ of α(ρn ) ⊂ Aδn with endpoints z1
and z2 such that dist(zj , ξj ) = δ ρn /10, j = 1, 2, and dist(Υ′ , ∂D ′ ) = δ ρn /10.
Let zj′ be a point in ξj at distance δ ρn /10 from zj , j = 1, 2. Then we take Υn
as the union of Υ′ with the two line segments [z1 , z1′ ] and [z2 , z2′ ]. Recall the
definition of dist(·, ·; ·) from (3.30), and note that dist(zj′ , ξ3−j ; D ′) > δ ρn /10,

                                           74
                                                 ξ1
                                         D′
                                                B3r

                                               ξ2
                                   α1
                                              ∂B(0, r ′ )



                          Figure 3.10: The domain D ′ .

j = 1, 2, for otherwise, by continuity again, there would be a point w ∈ D ′
satisfying dist(w, zj′ ; D ′ ) ≤ δ ρn /10 (and therefore w ∈ Aδn ) that is at equal
distance from ξ1 and from ξ2 , which would contradict our assumption η(n) >
δ ρn . It easily follows that in this case Υn is a (δ/20, 2 ρn )-barrier.
    We now assume that η(n) ≤ δ ρn . Let w1 ∈ Aδn be a point satisfy-
ing dist(w1 , ξ1 ) = dist(w1 , ξ2 ) ≤ δ ρn . For j = 1, 2, let pj ∈ ξj be a
point satisfying |w1 − pj | = dist(w1 , ∂D ′ ). If dist(pj , ξ3−j ; D ′) ≥ δ 2 ρn for
j = 1, 2, then we may take as our barrier the union [p1 , w1 ] ∪ [w1 , p2 ].
This will be a (δ/4, 2 δ ρn )-barrier. Otherwise, fix a point w2 satisfying
dist(w2 , pj ; D ′) ≤ δ 2 ρn and dist(w2 , ξ1 ) = dist(w2 , ξ2 ) ≤ δ 2 ρn and consider
the above construction with w2 in place of w1 . It may happen that the con-
struction succeeds now, and we construct a (δ/4, 2 δ 2 ρn )-barrier. Otherwise,
we find a point w3 ∈ D ′ satisfying dist(w3 , w1 ; D ′ ) ≤ (δ + δ 2 + δ 3 ) ρn such
that dist(w3 , ξ1 ) = dist(w3 , ξ2 ) ≤ δ 3 ρn . We continue this procedure until
some (δ/4, 2 δ m ρn ) barrier is obtained. The procedure must terminate suc-
cessfully at some finite m, for otherwise the points wm would converge to
some point in ξ1 ∩ ξ2 within distance 2 δ ρn from Aδn , which is clearly impos-
sible. Note that the barrier Υn thus constructed is contained in A2n δ . Thus,
when 1 ≤ n′ < n ≤ N, n, n′ ∈ N, we have dist(Υn , Υn′ ; D ′ ) > ρn /4 and Υn
separates α1 from Υn′ in D ′ .
    Suppose n ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N − 1}. Note that (contrary to what appears in
Figure 3.10, which does not show the scale of the lattice) the endpoints of Υn
are not on γ, since ξ1 ∪ ξ2 are disjoint from γ, by construction. On the event

                                         75
γ ∩Υn 6= ∅, let γ1 and γ2 be the two arcs of γ extending from the endpoints of
∂+ to the first encounter with Υn . Now we apply the Barriers Theorem 3.11
with Y = {Υn+1 }. Our careful construction above ensures that Υn+1 is an
(ǫ, diam Υn+1 )-barrier for some universal constant ǫ > 0. Note that ξ1 and
ξ2 contain vertices on which h takes the same sign. We conclude from the
theorem that
                                                    
                  P γ ∩ Υn+1 6= ∅ γ1 , γ2 , Φ3r , Θ2r < 1 − c1

for some c1 = c1 (Λ̄) > 0. The above implies
                                                  
             P γ ∩ Υn+1 6= ∅ γ ∩ Υn 6= ∅, Φ3r , Θ2r < 1 − c1 ,

which gives
                   P γ ∩ α1 6= ∅ Φ3r , Θ2r ≤ (1 − c1 )N −1 .
                                         
                                                                            (3.48)
Conditioned on γ, Φ3r and Θ2r , the probability of Z0σ is at most O(1)/ log r,
by the proof of the upper bound in Lemma 3.14. Thus,

          P γ ∩ α1 6= ∅, Z0σ Φ3r , Θ2r ≤ O(1) (1 − c1 )N −1 / log r .
                                     

On the other hand, the lower bound     tells us that on the event {Q(3r) ∧
Q(2r) ≥ c0 }, we have OΛ̄,p (1) P Z0σ Φ3r , Θ2r ≥ 1/ log r. Thus, (3.47) fol-
                                 

lows.
   Clearly, (3.47) also holds for α2 . On Z0σ let α1∗ and α2∗ be the two connected
components of α∩D(γ) that have one endpoint in S ′ and the other in ∂D(γ).
Note that when Z0σ holds and γ ∩ (α1 ∪ α2 ) = ∅, we have α1∗ ∪ α2∗ = α1 ∪ α2 .
Thus, (3.47) for α1 and for α2 together with (3.45) now gives

                P α1∗ ∪ α2∗ 6= α1 ∪ α2 ΦR , Θr , Z0σ < 3 p/10 .
                                                      
                                                                             (3.49)

   We now follow an analog of the above argument with the roles of inside
and outside switched. Observe that there is a connected component α̃ of
∂B(0, r ′ ) r S̃ such that S̃ ∪ α̃ separates ∂D from B3r . We fix such an α̃,
and if there is more than one possible choice, we choose in the same way in
which α was chosen from S ′ ; that is, we make sure that α = α̃ if S ′ = S̃ (as
unoriented paths). The point is that although α is Φ3r -measurable and α̃ is
ΘR/3 -measurable, we have α = α̃ if S ′ = S̃.
   On the event Q(ΘR/3 ) > 0, let α̃1 and α̃2 be the two connected compo-
nents of α̃ ∩D(βR/3 ) that have one endpoint on S̃ and the other on ∂D(βR/3 ).

                                        76
On the event Z0σ , let α̃1∗ and α̃2∗ be the two connected components of α̃ ∩D(γ)
that have one endpoint on S̃ and the other on ∂D(γ). Essentially the same
proof which gave (3.49) now gives

               P α̃1∗ ∪ α̃2∗ 6= α̃1 ∪ α̃2 ΦR , Θr , Z0σ < 3 p/10 .
                                                      
                                                                            (3.50)

But observe that when Z0σ and S ′ = S̃ hold, we clearly have α̃1∗ ∪ α̃2∗ = α1∗ ∪α2∗ .
Also recall that S ′ = S̃ when S∗ ⊂ Br′ /3 . Thus, we get from (3.46), (3.49)
and (3.50)

         P α̃1 ∪ α̃2 6= α1 ∪ α2 or S∗ 6⊂ Br′ /3 ΦR , Θr , Z0σ < 4 p/5 .
                                                            


    Assume that Z0σ , α̃1 ∪ α̃2 = α1∗ ∪ α2∗ = α1 ∪ α2 and S∗ ⊂ Br′ /3 hold. It re-
mains to show that in this case the path γ has no more than two disjoint arcs
connecting Br and ∂BR . Recall that α̃1 has an endpoint on ∂D(βR/3 ). This
endpoint is on a T G-triangle containing a T G∗ -vertex v1 ∈ βR/3 . Similarly,
there is a T G∗ vertex v2 ∈ βR/3 for which the T G-triangle containing it has
an endpoint of α̃2 . From α̃1 ∪ α̃2 = α1 ∪ α2 we conclude that v1 , v2 ∈ ext3r γ
as well.
    Shortly, we will prove that v1 and v2 are in separate connected components
of βR/3 r e∗σ . This implies that each connected component of βR/3 r e∗σ
intersects ext3r γ. Since βR/3 ∪ ext3r γ ⊂ γ, and γ is a simple path, it easily
follows that γ = βR/3 ∪ ext3r γ, which implies that there are at most two
disjoint crossings in γ between Br and ∂BR .
    It remains to prove that v1 and v2 are in different connected components
of βR/3 r e∗σ . This will be established using planar topology arguments. Let
α̂ consist of α̃1 ∪ α̃2 , a simple path S̃0 ⊂ S̃ connecting them, and short
line segments (contained in the T G-triangles containing v1 and v2 ) from the
endpoints of α̃1 and α̃2 on ∂D(βR/3 ) to v1 and v2 . Then α̂ is a simple path
and only the endpoints of α̂ are on γ. Let β̃ be the connected component
of βR/3 r {v1 , v2 } with endpoints v1 and v2 . Then β̃ ∪ α̂ is a simple closed
path and it suffices to show that e∗σ ⊂ β̃. If β̃ ∪ α̂ separates 0 from ∂D, then
β̃ must contain e∗σ , because each connected component of γ r {e∗σ } connects
∂D to T G∗ vertices adjacent to 0 and is disjoint from α̂ r {v1 , v2 }.
    Suppose that β̃ ∪ α̂ does not separate 0 from ∂D. Recall that α̃ ∪ S̃
separates ∂D from B3r and therefore from 0. Since S̃ itself does not separate
∂D from 0, it follows that the winding number of α̃ ∪ S̃0 around 0 is ±1
(depending on orientation). Since β̃ ∪ α̂ does not separate 0 from ∂D, its

                                         77
winding number around 0 is zero. If we remove from the union of the two
paths α̃ ∪ S̃0 and β̃ ∪ α̂ all the nontrivial arcs where they agree, we get
a closed curve χ, which consists of β̃, a segment of α̃ and the two short
connecting segments near v1 and v2 , and χ has odd winding number around
0. Consequently, it separates 0 from ∂D. But observe that S̃ is disjoint from
χ. Moreover, since we are assuming S∗ ⊂ Br′ /3 , it follows that intR/3 S̆ is
also disjoint from it. But this contradicts the fact that χ separates ∂D from
0, since intR/3 S̆ can be extended to a path disjoint from χ and connecting 0
and ∂D. Thus, the proof is now complete.


3.6     Coupling and limit
In this subsection, we retain our previous assumptions (h), (D) and (S) about
the system D, ∂+ , ∂− , h∂ , v0 , h, γ. Moreover, we also consider another such
system D ′ , ∂+
              ′    ′
                , ∂− , h′∂ , v0′ , h′ , γ ′ , which is assumed to satisfy the same
assumptions. In particular, kh′∂ k∞ ≤ Λ̄. Generally, we will use ′ to denote
objects related to the system in D ′ . For example, J ′ (r, R) will denote the
event corresponding to J (r, R).
Definition 3.18. Fix R > r > 0, and suppose that BR ⊂ D ∩ D ′ . Consider
the intersection extr γ ∩ BR as a collection of oriented paths, oriented so as
to have vertices in V+ (γ) on the right. We say that Φr and Φ′r match in BR
if the set of vertices in BR visited by extr S is the same as the corresponding
set for S ′ and extr γ ∩ BR = extr γ ′ ∩ BR with all the orientations agreeing
or with all the orientations reversed.
     We now show that if the configurations match in a big annulus, then it
is likely that the interfaces agree in the inner disk; more precisely, we have:

Lemma 3.19. For every δ > 0, r ≥ 10 and R∗ > r + 3 there is an R =
R(δ, r, R∗ , Λ̄) > R∗ such that the
                                   followingholds.    Suppose thatv0′ , v0 ∈
                                                                              / BR ⊂
D ∩ D , P ¬J (r, R ), Z0 Φr > 0 and P ¬J (r, R∗ ), Z0′ Φ′r > 0. Assume
        ′               ∗                            ′

that Φr and Φ′r match in BR . In particular, the endpoint q r of extr S in Br
is the same as that of extr S ′ . Let ν be the law of γ∗ := γ r extr γ (as an
unoriented path) conditioned on Z0 , Φr and ¬J (r, R∗ ), and let ν ′ be the law
of γ∗′ := γ ′ rextr γ ′ conditioned on Z0′ , Φ′r and ¬J ′ (r, R∗ ). Then kν −ν ′ k < δ.

    Here, kν−ν ′ k denotes the total variation norm ϑ ν[γ∗ = ϑ]−ν ′ [γ∗′ = ϑ] .
                                                          P




                                          78
Proof. Assume that the orientation of extr γ∩BR agrees with that of extr γ ′ ∩
                                                                    ′        ′
BR . This involves no loss of generality, since we may replace ∂+     with ∂−  ,
replace h′ by −h′ , etc.
    Since we are assuming P ¬J (r, R∗ ), Z0 Φr > 0, there is a path ϑ ⊂
                                                  

BR∗ such that P γ∗ = ϑ, ¬J (r, R∗ ), Z0 Φr > 0. Let Γ̂ be the collection of
                                              

all such ϑ, and fix some ϑ ∈ Γ̂. Obviously, the length of ϑ is O(R∗ )2 . We
start extending extr γ starting at one of the endpoints, say xr , and consider
the conditional probability that each successive step follows ϑ, given that the
previous steps have and given Φr . Each step is decided by the sign of h on
a specific vertex v. When we condition on the values of h on the neighbors
of v, the conditional law of h(v) is a Gaussian with some constant positive
variance. It follows from (3.2) that with high probability (conditioned on the
success of the previous steps) the mean of this Gaussian random variable is
unlikely to be large. Thus, the probability for either sign is bounded away
from zero, which means that each step is successful with probability bounded
away from zero. By (3.3) it is unlikely that h(v) will be very close to zero.
Proposition 3.3 therefore implies that if R > R∗ is very large, the probability
for a successful one step extension for γ ′ is almost the same as for γ. Thus,
we conclude that for sufficiently large R > R∗
      (1 − δ) P γ∗′ = ϑ Φ′r ≤ P γ∗ = ϑ Φr ≤ (1 + δ) P γ∗′ = ϑ Φ′r
                                                                    

holds for all ϑ ∈ Γ̂. It is moreover clear that
      P Z0 , ¬J (r, R∗ ) γ∗ = ϑ, Φr = P Z0′ , ¬J ′ (r, R∗ ) γ∗′ = ϑ, Φ′r ,
                                                                     

because under ¬J (r, R∗ ) the random walk S cannot get close to any place
where extr γ differs from extr γ ′ between the first visit to q r and time τ0 . Thus,
                         P γ∗ = ϑ, Z0 , ¬J (r, R∗ ) Φr
                                                         
               1−δ ≤  ′                                   ≤ 1+δ.
                        P γ∗ = ϑ, Z0′ , ¬J ′ (r, R∗ ) Φ′r
The lemma follows (though perhaps δ needs to be readjusted).
   The next lemma shows that given ΦR the events Z0σ have comparable
probabilities for different σ.
Lemma 3.20. As usual, assume (h), (D) and (S). There is a constant c =
c(Λ̄) ≥ 1 such that for all R sufficiently large and every σ, σ ′ ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 5}
we have                                      ′
                        P Z0σ ΦR ≤ c P Z0σ ΦR .
                                                   


                                         79
Proof. The statement is clear when R = 100, because in that case if it
is at all possible to extend ΦR in such a way that Z0σ holds, then there is
                                                                 ′
probability bounded away from zero (by a function of Λ̄) that Z0σ holds. (We
may choose the continuations of γ and S as we please, and as long as the
continuations involve a bounded number of steps, the probability for these
continuations are bounded away from zero, as in the proof of Lemma 3.19.)
When R > 100, we may just condition on the corresponding extension of ΦR
up to radius 100.
    We now come to one of the main results in this section — the existence
of a limiting interface.

Theorem 3.21 (Limit existence). There is a (unique) probability measure
µ∞ on the space of two-sided infinite simple T G∗ -paths γ̇ which is the limit of
the law of γ (unoriented) conditioned on Z0 and ΦR , in the following sense.
Assume (h), (D) and (S). For every finite set of T G∗ -edges E0 and every
δ > 0 there is an R0 = R0 (δ, E0 , Λ̄) such that if R > R0 , v0 ∈
                                                                  / BR ⊂ D and
P Z0 ΦR > 0, then
                                    
                     P E0 ⊂ γ Z0 , ΦR − µ∞ [E0 ⊂ γ̇] < δ .

Proof. Clearly, it suffices to show  thatfor every r > 0′ if R       is sufficiently
             ′                 ′                                     ′
large, v0 , v0 ∈
               / BR ⊂ D ∩ D , P Z0 ΦR > 0 and P Z0 ΦR > 0 then we
may couple the conditioned laws of γ given ΦR and Z0 and γ ′ given Φ′R and
Z0′ such that

               P γ r extr γ = γ ′ r extr γ ′ ΦR , Z0 , Φ′R , Z0′ > 1 − δ .
                                                               
                                                                                  (3.51)

(Here, the equivalence is an equivalence of unoriented paths.) Let an be the
constant a given by Lemma 3.17 when one takes p = δn := 2−n δ/8. We
define a sequence of radii r0 , r1 , . . . inductively, as follows. Let c1 be the
constant c given by Corollary 3.16, and set r0 := r ∨ 10 ∨ c1 . Given rn , let
r̂n be the R promised by Lemma 3.19 when we take rn for r, δn for δ and
an rn for R∗ . Finally, set rn+1 = 4 an r̂n . Let c2 be the constant promised
by Lemma 3.20. We assume, with no loss of generality, that δ < 1/(4 c1 ).
Let N ∈ N be sufficiently large so that (1 − 1/(72 c1 c22 ))N −1 < δ/2. We will
prove (3.51) on the assumption that R > 6 rN .
    The construction of the coupling is as follows. First, we choose ΦrN−1 and
Φ′rN−1 independently according to their conditional distribution given ΦR , Z0 ,

                                          80
Φ′R and Z0′ . We proceed by reverse induction. Suppose that n ∈ [1, N −1]∩N
and that Φrn and Φ′rn have been determined. If Φrn and Φ′rn match inside
Br̂n , then we couple γ and γ ′ in such a way as to maximize the probability
that γ rextrn γ = γ ′ rextrn γ ′ , subject to maintaining their correct conditional
distributions given the choices previously made. If they do not match, then
we couple Φrn−1 and Φ′rn−1 in such a way as to maximize the probability that
they match in Br̂n−1 , subject to their correct conditional distributions. If
Φr0 and Φ′r0 have been determined, but γ and γ ′ have not, then we couple γ
and γ ′ arbitrarily, subject to their correct conditional distributions.
    We claim that the coupling just described achieves the bound (3.51).
Let Mn denote the event that Φrn and Φ′rn match inside Br̂n , where n ∈
{1, 2, . . . , N − 1}, and let M denote the union of these events Mn . It
follows from the choice of r̂n that if Mn holds and n is the largest n′ ∈
{1, 2, . . . , N − 1} with that property, then there is a coupling of the appro-
priately conditioned laws of γ and γ ′ such that

  P γ r extrn γ 6= γ ′ r extrn γ ′ Φrn , Φ′rn , Z0 , Z0′
                                                        

                 ≤ δn + P J (rn , an rn ) Φrn , Z0′ + P J ′ (rn , an rn ) Φ′rn , Z0′ ,
                                                                                 

and hence this also holds for our coupling. By taking conditional expectation
and summing over n, we get

  P M, γ r extr γ 6= γ ′ r extr γ ′ ΦR , Z0 , Φ′R , Z0′
                                                       

                N −1
                X                                                              
                     P J (rn , an rn ) ΦR , Z0 + P J ′ (rn , an rn ) Φ′R , Z0′
                                                        
      ≤ δ/8 +
                  n=1
        ≤ 3 δ/8      (by the choice of an ) .

   Now fix some n ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N − 2}, and suppose that none of the events
Mn′ , n′ > n occurs. Fix some arbitrary σ ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 5}. Conditional on
Φrn+1 and on Z0 , by the choice of c2 , there is probability at least 1/(6 c2 )
that Z0σ holds, and the same is true for the system in D ′ . If we additionally
condition on Z0σ and Z0σ ′ , then by the choice of c1 there is a coupling of the
appropriate conditioned laws of Θrn+1 /4 and Θ′rn+1 /4 such that

            P Θrn+1 /4 = Θ′rn+1 /4 Φrn+1 , Φ′rn+1 , Z0σ , Z0σ ′ ≥ 1/c1 .
                                                              

But note that if Θrn+1 /4 = Θ′rn+1 /4 and ¬ J (r̂n , rn+1/4) ∪ J ′ (r̂n , rn+1/4)
                                                                                  

both hold (as well as Z0σ ∩ Z0σ ′ ), then Mn holds as well. We may then

                                         81
consider a coupling of the two systems which first decides the two events Z0σ
and Z0σ ′ independently, and if both hold (which happens with probability at
least 1/(6 c2 )2 ), then with conditional probability at least 1/c1 we also have
Θrn+1 /4 = Θ′rn+1 /4 . Thus, under this coupling
   (6 c2 )2 P Mn Φrn+1 , Φ′rn+1 , Z0 , Z0′
                                          
                                                                  ′       σ    σ′
          ≥ c−1                            ′
                                                                                 
             1 − P J (r̂n , rn+1 /4) ∪ J (r̂n , rn+1 /4) Φrn+1 , Φrn+1 , Z0 , Z0

         ≥ c−1
            1 − 2 δn     (by the choices of rn+1 and an )
            −1
         ≥ c1 /2     (by our assumption 4 c1 δ < 1).
This must hold for our coupling as well. Consequently, induction gives
                                        1 N −1
                      P ¬M ≤ 1 −                   ,
                                        72 c22 c1
which is less than δ/2 by the choice of N. Thus (3.51) follows, and the proof
is complete.


3.7     Boundary values of the interface
Consider the random path γ̇ whose law is the measure µ∞ provided by The-
                                               ∗
orem 3.21. We orient γ̇ so that the edges   S5eσ , σ∗ = 0, 1, . . . , 5 that are in γ̇ are
oriented clockwise around the hexagon σ=0 eσ centered at 0. Let U+ denote
the set of T G-vertices adjacent to γ̇ on its right hand side, and let U− de-
note the set of vertices adjacent to γ̇ on its left hand side. Using the heights
interface continuity (Proposition 3.3), it is clear that given γ̇ we may define
the DGFF ḣ on all of T G conditioned to be positive on U+ and negative on
U− , as a limit of an appropriately conditioned DGFF on bounded domains.
Moreover, many properties of the DGFF on bounded domains easily transfer
to ḣ. In particular, (3.2) applies, to give E |ḣ(0)| γ̇ = O(1). Set
                                               
                                  λ := E ḣ(0) .                                   (3.52)
Clearly, 0 < λ < ∞.
   Recall that τ is the first time t such that St ∈ ∂D(γ) and recall the
notation dist(·, ·; ·) from (3.30). In this subsection we will show that in the
limit as dist(v0 , ∂D) → ∞ we have
                         h                            i
                       E (±h(Sτ ) − λ) 1{Sτ ∈V± (γ)} γ → 0
in probability, under the assumption that

                                           82
 (∂) h∂ (∂+ ∩ V∂ ) ⊂ [−Λ0 , Λ̄] and h∂ (∂− ∩ V∂ ) ⊂ [−Λ̄, Λ0 ],

where Λ0 = Λ0 (Λ̄) > 0 is the constant given by Lemma 3.9. The importance
of the assumption (∂) is that by Remark 3.12 it enables the application of
the Barriers Theorem 3.11 to barriers with endpoints on ∂D, provided that
the barriers in Y+ do not have endpoints in ∂− and those in Y− do not have
endpoints in ∂+ . This will allow us to prove:

Theorem 3.22. Assume (h), (D), (S) and (∂). There are positive constants
ζ2 = ζ2 (Λ̄) and c = c(Λ̄) such that the following holds true. Let z be any
point on ∂+ . Then for every r > 1,
                                                          ζ
                P dist(z, γ; D) < r ≤ c r/ dist(z, ∂− ; D) 2 .
                                  


Proof. Let β1 and β2 be the two components of ∂+ r {z}. Let R =
dist(z, ∂− ; D). For each ρ ∈ (0, R), let A(ρ) denote the connected component
of B(z, ρ) ∩ D that has z in its boundary, and let α(ρ) denote the connected
component of ∂A(ρ) r ∂D that separates z from ∂− in D. Using this con-
struction, the proof proceeds as in the proof (3.48), except that the barriers
start from the outside and get closer to z, and we appeal to Remark 3.12
instead of the Barriers Theorem. We leave it to the reader to verify that the
proof carries over with no other significant modifications.
   Our next lemma shows that it is unlikely that Sτ is adjacent to γ and is
near ∂D.

Lemma 3.23. Assume (h), (D), (S) and (∂). For every p > 0 there is some
δ = δ(p, Λ̄) > 0 such that
                                                      
                  P 0 < dist(Sτ , ∂D) < δ dist(v0 , ∂D) < p .

Proof. Let τD be the first t such that St ∈ ∂D, and let M = M(S, γ) :=
{St : St ∈ ∂D(γ), 0 ≤ t < τD }. We will prove the stronger statement
                                                  
                   P dist(M, ∂D) < δ dist(v0 , ∂D) < p .             (3.53)

(By convention dist(∅, ∂D) = ∞.) Fix r > 0 and set R = dist(v0 , ∂D). Con-
ditioned on dist(M, ∂D) < r, we have dist(SτD , γ; D) < 4 r with probability
bounded away from zero, since the random walk started at any v ∈ M such
that dist(v, ∂D) < r has probability bounded away from 0 to surround the


                                       83
                                                            y∂
                              v0

                         D∗




                     x∂
                 Figure 3.11: The set Lr0 (shaded) and D∗ .

closest point to v on ∂D (and therefore hit ∂D) before exiting the ball of
radius 2 r about that point. It therefore suffices to prove
                                                
                       P dist(SτD , γ; D) < δ R < p                (3.54)

for δ = δ(p, Λ̄) > 0. Let A+ = A+ (δ) denote the event dist(SτD , ∂− ; D) >
δ 1/2 R, and similarly define A− with ∂− replaced by ∂+ . By conditioning on
SτD , Theorem 3.22 shows that
                                                  
                      P A+ , dist(SτD , γ; D) < δ R < p/3

for an appropriate choice of δ. A symmetric
                                                     applies on A− . Conse-
                                               argument
quently, it is enough to prove that P ¬(A+ ∪ A− ) < p/3 for an appropriate
choice of δ.
    Fix r0 := δ 1/2 R, let Lr0 denote the set of points that lie on some path in
D of diameter at most r0 connecting ∂+ and ∂− , and let D∗ be the connected
component of v0 in D r Lr0 . (See Figure 3.11.) We now prove that

   ∂D∗ r ∂D is contained in the union of two balls of radius 2 r0 .      (3.55)

Every path connecting ∂+ and ∂− in D must separate v0 from x∂ or from
y∂ in D (because, by Jordan’s theorem, it separates x∂ from y∂ in D). Let
Γ1 [respectively, Γ2 ] denote the collection of paths in D of diameter at most
r0 that connect ∂+ and ∂− and separate x∂ [respectively, y∂ ] from v0 . Then
∂D∗ r ∂D is contained in the union of the set of points belonging to a path

                                      84
in Γ1 and the set of points belonging to a path in Γ2 . Suppose that α and α′
are two paths in Γ1 , both of which intersect ∂D∗ . Let β be a path connecting
x∂ with α ∪ α′ in D, which is disjoint from α ∪ α′ , except for its endpoint.
If β ∩ α 6= ∅, then one can connect x∂ to v0 in β ∪ α ∪ D∗ , and therefore
α ∩ α′ 6= ∅ (since α′ separates v0 from x∂ in D). Similar reasoning applies
if β ∩ α′ 6= ∅. It follows that any two paths in Γ1 that intersect ∂D∗ must
intersect each other, and hence the collection of all such paths is covered by
the ball of radius 2 r0 centered at any point on any such path. Since a similar
argument applies to Γ2 , (3.55) follows.
    By (3.55) and Lemma Hit Near 2.1
                                              
                           P ∃t ≤ τD : St ∈ Lr0 < p/3
                                                                   
for all sufficiently small δ > 0. Thus P ¬(A+ ∪ A− ) = P SτD ∈ Lr0 < p/3,
and the proof is complete.
    Next, we show that Sτ is unlikely to be close to v0 by proving the same
for γ.
Lemma 3.24. Assume (h) and (D). There are constants c > 0, ζ3 > 0, both
depending only on Λ̄, such that for every δ > 0
                  P dist(v0 , γ) < δ dist(v0 , ∂D) < c δ ζ3 .
                                                 

   We expect that the left hand side is bounded by δ 1/2+o(1) , using the cor-
responding result [RS05] for SLE(4).
Proof. Let Υn denote the circle of radius 2−n−1 dist(v0 , ∂D) about v0 . As
in the proof of (3.48), the Barriers Theorem 3.11 implies that given that γ
intersects Υn (where n ∈ N), the conditional probability that γ does not
intersect Υn+1 is bounded away from zero by a function of Λ̄, provided that
2−n−1 dist(v0 , ∂D) > 10, say. The lemma follows by induction.

Proposition 3.25. Assume (h), (D), (S) and (∂). For every ǫ > 0 there is
an R = R(ǫ, Λ̄) such that
                     h                         2 i
                   E E |h(Sτ )| − λ 1{Sτ /∈∂D} γ      <ǫ          (3.56)

holds, provided that dist(v0 , ∂D) > R, where λ is the constant given by (3.52).
   The proof is based on the simple idea that given a single instance of γ we
consider two independent copies of (h, S).

                                      85
Proof. Set                                               
                        X := E (|h(Sτ )| − λ) 1{Sτ /∈∂D} γ .
To get a handle on E[X 2 ], let (h′ , S ′ ) be independent from (h, S) given
γ and have the same conditional law as that of (h, S)                 given γ. Thus,
                                          ′     ′            ′             ′
(h, S, γ) has the same law as (h , S , γ). Let τ := min t : St ∈ ∂D(γ) ,
y := E |h(Sτ )| − λ Sτ , γ and y ′ := E |h′ (Sτ′ ′ )| − λ Sτ′ ′ , γ . Then X 2 =
E y y ′ 1{Sτ ,Sτ′ ′ /∈∂D} γ and hence

                               E X 2 = E y y ′ 1{Sτ ,Sτ′ ′ /∈∂D} .
                                                              
                                                                                    (3.57)
                                                                                 
Fix some r3 ≫ r2 ≫ r1 ≫ 0, and assume that dist 0, {v0 , ∂D} > r3 .
Suppose that we condition on Z0 ; that is, on Sτ = 0. Then with high
conditional probability |Sτ′ ′ | > 2 r2 and moreover dist 0, {S0′ , S1′ , . . . , Sτ′ ′ } >
                                                                                         

2 r2 . By the heights interface continuity (Proposition 3.3), given extr1 γ and
Sτ′ ′ and γ r extr1 γ ⊂ Br2 , the actual choice of γ r extr1 γ can change the
value of y ′ by very little if |Sτ′ ′ | > 2 r2 . Thus, we conclude that y ′ 1Sτ′ ′ /∈∂D is
nearly independent from y given Z0 , ¬J (r1 , r2 ) and extr1 γ. Since y and y ′
are bounded, in the limit as r3 → ∞

   E y y ′ 1{Sτ′ ′ /∈∂D} Z0 , extr1 γ, ¬J
                                           

        = o(1) + E y ′ 1{Sτ′ ′ /∈∂D} Z0 , extr1 γ, ¬J E y Z0 , extr1 γ, ¬J , (3.58)
                                                                           

                                                              
where J = J (r1 , r2 ). By Lemma 3.17, P J Z0 → 0 as r2 /r1 → ∞. Thus
                                                                
                       E y Z0 , extr1 γ, ¬J − E y Z0 , extr1 γ → 0

in probability as r2 /r1 → ∞. A similar remark applies to the other terms
in (3.58). Since y and y ′ are bounded, taking conditional expectation given
Z0 in (3.58) gives

  E y y ′ 1{Sτ′ ′ /∈∂D} Z0
                          
                        h                                                     i
         = o(1) + E E[y ′ 1{Sτ′ ′ /∈∂D} | Z0 , extr1 γ] E[y | Z0 , extr1 γ] Z0 . (3.59)

    By the Limit Existence Theorem 3.21, given Z0 and extr1 γ, near 0 the
path γ∗ is close in distribution
                                to γ̇ when r1 is large. Consequently, Propo-
sition 3.3 implies that E |h(0)| Z0 , extr1 γ − λ = o(1) as r1 → ∞, which
gives                                      
                            E y Z0 , extr1 γ = o(1) .

                                            86
Now (3.59) implies that
                             E y y ′ 1{Sτ′ ′ /∈∂D} Z0 → 0
                                                    
                                                                                   (3.60)
                             
as dist 0, ∂D ∪ {v  0 } → ∞. Lemma 3.23 and                  Lemma
                                                                    3.24 tell us that for
r0 < ∞ fixed P Sτ ∈          / ∂D, dist Sτ , ∂D ∪ {v0 } < r0 → 0 as dist(v0 , ∂D) →
∞. Since there is nothing special             about the vertex at 0, except for our
assumption that dist 0, ∂D ∪ {v0 } is large, we conclude from (3.60) that
                               lim E y y ′ 1{Sτ ,Sτ′ ′ /∈∂D} Sτ = 0
                                                              

in probability, as dist(v0 , ∂D) → ∞. Now, (3.57) implies that E X 2 →
                                                                                  

0, since y y ′ 1{Sτ ,Sτ′ ′ /∈∂D} is bounded. This gives (3.56) and completes the
proof.
   Let F be the function that is equal to h∂ on ∂D, λ on V+ (γ), −λ on V−(γ)
and         harmonic on all other T G vertices in D. Since E h(v0 ) γ =
  is discrete
E h(Sτ ) γ , Proposition 3.25 gives
                                    
                         E h(v0 ) γ − F (v0 ) → 0                       (3.61)
in probability as dist(v0 , ∂D) → ∞.
    We now need to generalize the Proposition and (3.61) to apply when γ is
replaced by an appropriate initial segment of γ.
    Let T be some stopping time for γ started at x∂ and let γ T denote γ
stopped at T . (Note that the relevant filtration here, the one generated by
intitial segments of γ, only reveals the signs of h on vertices adjacent to these
initial segments, but not the actual values of h.) Let zT denote the vertex in
∂D(γ T ) first visited by S, and let S T denote the initial segment of S up to
its first visit to zT .
Lemma 3.26. Assume (h), (D), (S) and (∂). For every p0 > 0 there is
some s = s(p0 , Λ̄) > 0 such that
           P dist(zT , γ r γ T ) < s dist(v0 , ∂D), zT ∈
                                                          
                                                       / ∂D < p0 .
     Note that we could rather easily prove the estimate with dist(zT , γ r
γ T ; D(γ T )) instead of dist(zT , γ r γ T ), by the argument giving (3.48), but
this is not sufficient for our purposes. The idea of the proof of the lemma is
to first show that Sτ = zT is usually not too unlikely given γ T and S. Then
Lemma 3.17 may be used in conjunction with the argument giving (3.48) to
deduce the required result. Note, that the event Sτ = zT is the event that
γ r γ T is not adjacent to any vertex visited by S prior to zT .

                                           87
Proof. We first show that for every ǫ > 0 there is a p > 0 and an R > 0,
both depending only on ǫ and Λ̄ such that
                       h                      i
                                        T
                     P P[zT = Sτ | S, γ ] < p < ǫ                  (3.62)

holds provided that dist(v0 , ∂D) > R.
    We choose δ = δ(ǫ, Λ̄) > 0 very small. Set r = dist(v0 , ∂D), and assume
that r > 100 δ −2 . Set DT := D(γ T ). Let bT be the point on ∂DT near the tip
of γ T that is at equal distance from V+ (γ T ) and V− (γ T ) along ∂DT . Let ∂+       T
       T
and ∂− denote the two connected components of ∂DT r {y∂ , bT } that have
                                         T
y∂ and bT as their endpoints, with ∂+        the one containing vertices in ∂+ .
                                      T                     T
    Let A1 be the event dist(zT , ∂+ ; DT ) ∨ dist(zT , ∂−    ; DT ) ≥ 2 δ r, let A2 be
                    T       −1
the event diam(S ) < δ r, let A3 be the event that the diameter of the
segment of S T after the first time at which it is distance at most δ 2 r from
∂DT is less than δ r/2, and let A4 be the event dist(v0 , γ T ) ≥ δ 1/2 r.         
    Lemma 3.24 shows that if δ = δ(Λ̄, ǫ) is sufficiently small, then P ¬A4 <
ǫ/4. Lemma Hit Near 2.1 implies      that, by choosing δ sufficiently small,
one can ensure that P ¬Aj γ T < ǫ/4 for j = 2, 3. We now prove the
same for j = 1. Assume that A4 holds. Let L be the set of points in DT
                                                                             T        T
that lie on a path of diameter at most 4 δ r in D T connecting ∂+               and ∂−  ,
and let D∗ be the connected component of DT r L that contains v0 (we
know that v0 ∈   / L, since δ is small and A4 holds). By (3.55) applied to
DT in place of D, ∂D∗ ∩ DT may be covered by two balls of radius 8 δ r.
Thus,
       Lemma Hit Near 2.1 shows that if δ = δ(ǫ) is chosen        sufficiently
                                                                                 small
        L before ∂DT , A4 < ǫ/4. This implies P ¬A1 , A4 < ǫ/4. Thus
PS hits
P ¬A < ǫ, where A := A1 ∩ A2 ∩ A3 ∩ A4 .
   We now complete  the proof of inequality (3.62) by showing that the event
P Sτ = zT S, γ T < p is contained in ¬A if p = p(Λ̄, δ) > 0 is chosen suffi-
ciently  small. The latter is equivalent to showing that the random variable
P Sτ = zT S, γ T is bounded away from zero on A by a function of δ and
  

Λ̄.
                                                  T
    Suppose that A holds, and that zT ∈ ∂+          . Let ξ1 and ξ2 be the two con-
                          T
nected components of ∂+ r {zT }. The construction of Υn in the proof (3.48)
shows that there is a path Υ0 connecting ξ1 and ξ2 in B(zT , δ r)rB(z       T , δ r/2)
                           T
that separates zT from ∂− in DT such that Υ0 is an s, diam(Υ0 ) -barrier for
(D, γT ) for every s ∈ (0, δ ′ ], where δ ′ ∈ (0, 1) is a universal constant. (The
assumption that A1 holds is used here.) If S T never visits a vertex adjacent
to Υ0 , then Υ0 separates S T from ∂−    T
                                            . In this situation, if γ r γ T does not

                                           88
hit Υ0 , then S T does not visit a vertex adjacent to it, and therefore zT = Sτ .
Thus, the BarriersTheorem 3.11 (or    Remark 3.12) applies to give the needed
lower bound on P Sτ = zT S, γ T when S T does not visit a vertex adjacent
to Υ0 .
    Suppose now that S T does visit vertices adjacent to Υ0 . We can then
construct a path Υ whose image is Υ0 as well as all the boundaries of hexagons
visited by S T that are not separated from ∂−      T
                                                     by Υ0 . Since we are assuming
that A2 holds, diam(Υ) ≤ 2 δ r. Since A3 holds, dist(ΥrΥ0 , ∂DT ) > δ 2 r/2
                                 −1

and therefore also diam(Υ0 ) > δ 2 r/2. Consequently, Υ is a (δ ′ δ 3 /2, 2 δ −1 r)-
barrier. Now Theorem 3.11      and RemarkT 3.12 may be used again to give a
similar lower bound on P Sτ = zT S, γ . As a similar argument applies
               T
when Sτ ∈ ∂−     , the proof of (3.62) is now complete.
    We now choose ǫ = p0 /9 and take a p > 0 and R > 0 depending only
on ǫ and Λ̄ and satisfying (3.62). Let a be such that the estimate given in
Lemma 3.17 holds with the p there replaced by p0 p/9. Let δ = δ(p0 , Λ̄) > 0
be sufficiently small so that δ −1 > R ∨ a. We assume that r > 10 δ −5. For
z ∈ D, let Jz denote the event that there are more than two disjoint arcs
in γ joining the two circles ∂B(z, δ 4 r) and ∂B(z, δ 5 r), and let JzT denote
                                                                T
the event that there are more than two such arcs      in γ4 . By the choice of a
and δ, the probability that dist Sτ , ∂D ∪ {v0 } > 4 δ r and JSτ holds is at
most p0 p/9. Consequently,      the same bound applies for the probability that
dist zT , ∂D ∪ {v0 } > 4 δ 4 r, zT = Sτ and JzTT holds. Thus, as the events
                       

dist zT , ∂D ∪ {v0 } > 4 δ 4 r and JzTT are (γ T , S) measurable,

        p0 p/9 ≥ P zT = Sτ , dist(zT , ∂D ∪ {v0 }) > 4 δ 4 r, JzTT
                                                                     
                     h                                                        i
                                                               4       T    T
               = E P[zT = Sτ , dist(zT , ∂D ∪ {v0 }) > 4 δ r, JzT | γ , S]
                     h                                                   i
               = E P[zT = Sτ | γ T , S] 1{dist(zT ,∂D∪{v0 })>4 δ4 r} 1JzT .
                                                                     T


By (3.62) and our choice of ǫ, we therefore have

               P dist(zT , ∂D ∪ {v0 }) > 4 δ 4 r, JzTT ≤ 2 p0 /9 .
                                                     
                                                                             (3.63)

    Let H denote the event (γ r γ T ) ∩ ∂B(zT , δ 5 r) 6= ∅. Now condition on
γ T and S such that dist(zT , ∂D) > δ r and ¬JzTT holds. Suppose also that
dist(zT , bT ) > δ 3 r. Then there are precisely two connected components of
B(zT , δ 4 r)∩DT that intersect ∂B(zT , δ 5 r). Let w1 , w2 ∈ ∂B(zT , δ 5 r)∩DT be
points in each of these two connected components. By constructing barriers

                                        89
as in the proof of (3.48) it is easy to see that if δ = δ(p0 , Λ̄) is sufficiently
small, then

              P dist wj , γ r γ T ; D(γ T ) ≤ δ 4 r) γ T , S ≤ p0 /9
                                                            

for j = 1, 2. Now note that if dist wj , γ r γ T ; D(γ T ) > δ 4 r for j = 1, 2,
                                                              

then ¬H holds. Consequently,

         P H, ¬JzTT , dist(zT , bT ) > δ 3 r, dist(zT , ∂D) > δ r ≤ 2 p0 /9 .
                                                                

We combine this with (3.63), and get

  P H, dist(v0 , zT ) > 4 δ 4 r, dist(zT , bT ) > δ 3 r, dist(zT , ∂D) > δ r
                                                                            

                                                                       ≤ 4 p0 /9 . (3.64)

Since r = dist(v0 , ∂D), provided that we take δ =             δ(p0 , Λ̄) > 0 suffi-
ciently small, Lemma     3.24 gives P dist(v0 , zT ) ≤ δ r  < p0 /9, Lemma Hit
                                                             2
                    
Near 2.1  gives  P  dist(v0 , zT ) > δ r,dist(zT , bT ) ≤ δ r  < p0 /9 and (3.53)
gives P dist(zT , ∂D) ≤ δ r, zT ∈   / ∂D  < p0 /9. These  last three estimates may
be combined with (3.64), to yield P H, zT ∈       / ∂D ≤ 7 p0 /9, which completes
the proof.
    We now prove the analog of (3.61) with γ T replacing γ. Let FT denote
the function that is +λ on V+ (γ T ), −λ on V− (γ T ), equal to h∂ on T G-vertices
in ∂D, and is discrete harmonic at all other vertices in D.
Proposition 3.27. Assume (h), (D), (S) and (∂).

                     E h(v0 ) γ T − FT (v0 ) → 0
                                

in probability as dist(v0 , ∂D) → ∞ while Λ̄ is held fixed.
Proof. Fix ǫ > 0, and set r := dist(v0 , ∂D). We have by the heights interface
continuity (Proposition 3.3)

                    E h(zT ) γ, zT − E h(zT ) γ T , zT < ǫ
                                                   


if dist(zT , γ r γT ) > R0 , where R0 = R0 (ǫ, Λ̄). Consequently, Lemma 3.26
with p0 = ǫ/OΛ̄ (1) > 0 gives
                  h                                   i
                 E E h(zT ) γ, zT − E h(zT ) γ T , zT
                                       
                                                           < 2ǫ       (3.65)

                                           90
            −1
                                                                            
when
   r > s T R0 , and s is as given by the lemma. (Note that E h(zT ) γ, zT =
E h(zT ) γ , zT when zT ∈ ∂D.)
    In the following, we will use a parameter δ > 0. The notation o(1) will
be shorthand for any quantity g satisfying limδ→0 limr→∞ |g| = 0 while Λ̄ is
fixed. Let Z be a maximal set of T G-vertices in D ∩ B(v0 , 2 δ −1 r) such that
the distance between any two such vertices is at least δ 2 r and the distance
between any such vertex to ∂D is at least δ 3 r. Then |Z| = O(δ −6 ). By (3.61)
(with each u ∈ Z in place of v0 ) we therefore have

                 P ∃u ∈ Z : E[h(u) − F (u) | γ]2 > ǫ = o(1) .
                                                    
                                                                         (3.66)

   Let t0 be the first t ∈ N such that dist(St , ∂D(γ T )) ≤ δ r. By Lemma Hit
Near 2.1,
                      P dist(zT , St0 ; D) ≥ δ 1/2 r = o(1) .
                                                   
                                                                         (3.67)
By (3.54),
                 P dist(zT , γ; D) < δ 1/3 r, zT ∈ ∂D = o(1) ,
                                                    

while Lemma 3.26 gives

             P dist(zT , γ r γT ) < δ 1/3 r, zT ∈
                                                   
                                                / ∂D = o(1) .

Thus,
                    P dist(zT , γ r γT ; D) < δ 1/3 r = o(1) .
                                                    

This and (3.67) imply

                 P dist(St0 , γ r γ T ; D) < δ 1/3 r/2 = o(1) .
                                                     
                                                                        (3.68)

Since dist(St0 , ∂D(γ T )) < δ r, this and Lemma Hit Near 2.1 imply that with
probability 1 − o(1) the L1 norm of the difference between the discrete har-
                                     T
monic measure from St0 on ∂D(γ       ) and the discrete
                                                        harmonic measure
                                                                         from
                                                                             
St0 on ∂D(γ) is o(1). Because E h(St0 ) γ, St0 is the average of E h(z) γ ,
where z is selected according to harmonic measure on ∂D(γ) from St0 and
similarly for γ T , we conclude from the above and (3.65) that

                  E h(St0 ) γ T , St0 − E h(St0 ) γ, St0 = o(1)
                                                      

in probability. By Lemma Hit Near 2.1, P dist(St0 , v0 ) > δ −1 r = o(1). On
                                                                 

the event dist(St0 , v0 ) ≤ δ −1 r, fix some z0 ∈ Z within distance δ 2 r from
St0 (if there is more than one such z0 , let z0 be chosen uniformly at ran-
dom among these given (h, γ, S)). By the Discrete Harnack Principle 2.2

                                       91
                                                          
and (3.68), we have E h(St0 ) γ, St0 − E h(z       0 ) γ, z0 = o(1) in probabil-
ity, which in conjunction with (3.66) yields E h(St0 ) γ, St0 − F (z0 ) = o(1).
The Discrete Harnack Principle now implies F (z0 ) − F (St0 ) = o(1) in proba-
bility, and (3.68) gives F (St0 ) − FT (St0 ) = o(1) in probability. Consequently,
E h(St0 ) γ T , St0 − FT (St0 ) = o(1) in probability. Since E h(·) γ T and
                                                                           

FT are discrete harmonic in D(γ T ), the proposition follows.
   We can now prove the height gap theorem:

Theorem 3.28. Assume (h), (D), (S) and (∂). As above, let T denote a
stopping time for γ, let γ T := γ[0, T ], let DT be the complement in D of
the closed triangles meeting γ[0, T ). Let hT denote the restriction of h to
V ∩ ∂DT and let v0 be some vertex in D. Then

                      E h(v0 ) γ T , hT − FT (v0 ) → 0
                                       


in probability as dist(v0 , ∂D) → ∞ while Λ̄ is held fixed, where FT is as in
Proposition 3.27.

Proof. Set
                   X := E h(v0 ) γ T , hT − E h(v0 ) γ T .
                                                     

By Proposition 3.27, it suffices to show that X → 0 in probability as
dist(v0 , ∂D) → ∞. For v ∈ V ∩ ∂DT , let av denote the conditional proba-
bility that simple random walk started at v0 first hits ∂DT at v, given γ T .
Then                      X
                                av h(v) − E[h(v) | γ T ] .
                                                        
                    X=
                             v∈V ∩∂DT

Consequently,
                X
         X2 =          av au h(v) − E[h(v) | γ T ] h(u) − E[h(u) | γ T ] .
                                                                       
                 v,u


Now Corollary 3.5 implies that it suffices to show that for every r > 0
                     X
                         av au 1{|v−u|<r} 1{v,u /∈V∂ } → 0
                           v,u


in probability. This follows by Lemmas 2.1 and 3.24.



                                          92
4     Recognizing the driving term
In this section we use a technique introduced in [LSW04] and used again
in [SS05] in order to show that the driving term for the Loewner evolution
given by the DGFF interface with boundary values −a and b converges to
the driving term of SLE(4; a/λ − 1, b/λ − 1) if a, b ∈ [−Λ0 , Λ̄]. The reader
unfamiliar with this method is advised to first learn the technique from [SS05,
§4] or [LSW04, §3.3]. The account in [SS05] is closer to the present setup
and somewhat simpler, but some parts of the argument there are referred
back to [LSW04].
    The present argument is more involved than those of the above mentioned
papers, because we prove convergence to an instance of SLE(κ; ρ1 , ρ2 ) rather
than just plain SLE(4). The main added difficulty comes from the fact that
the drift term in SLE(κ; ρ1 , ρ2 ) becomes unbounded as Wt comes close to the
force points. These difficulties disappear if a = b = λ, in which case the
convergence is to ordinary SLE and the argument giving the convergence of
the driving term to scaled Brownian motion is easily established with minor
adaptations of the established method. We therefore forego dwelling on this
simpler case, and move on to the more general setting, assuming that the
reader is already familiar with the fundamentals of the method.

4.1    About the definition of SLE(κ; ρ1, ρ2 )
Throughout this section, given a Loewner evolution defined by a continuous
Wt , we will let xt and yt be defined as in Section 1.4 by xt := sup{gt (x) :
x < 0, x ∈ / Kt } and yt := inf{gt (x) : x > 0, x ∈    / Kt }, and we make use
of the definition of SLE(κ; ρ1 , ρ2 ) in Section 1.4 by means of the SDE (1.5).
As we mentioned in Section 1.4, some subtlety is involved in extending the
definition of SLE(κ; ρ1 , ρ2 ) beyond times when Wt hits the force points, and
in starting the process from the natural initial values x0 = W0 = y0 = 0.
This is closely related to the issues involved in defining the Bessel process,
which we presently recall.
    The Bessel process Zt of dimension δ > 0 and initial value x 6= 0 satisfies
the SDE
                               δ−1
                      dZt =          dt + dBt ,     Z0 = x ,              (4.1)
                                2Zt




                                      93
which we also write in integral form as
                                Z t
                                    δ−1
                     Zt = x +           ds + Bt − B0 ,                     (4.2)
                                 0 2Zs

up until the first time t for which Zt = 0. When defining Zt for all times,
this SDE is awkward to work with directly since the drift blows up whenever
Zt gets close to zero (and some of the standard existence and uniqueness
theorems for SDE solutions, as given, e.g., in [RY99], do not apply in this
situation). However, for every δ > 0, the square of the Bessel process Zt2
turns out to satisfy an SDE whose drift remains bounded and for which
existence and uniqueness of solutions follow easily from standard theorems.
For this reason, many authors construct the Bessel process by first defining
the square of the Bessel process via an SDE that it satisfies and then taking
its square root [RY99]. (Recall also that when δ ≤ 1 the Bessel itself does not
satisfy (4.2) at all without a principal value correction. Even when 1 < δ < 2,
which, as we will see below, is the case that corresponds to SLE(κ; ρ) that hit
the boundary and can be continued after hitting the boundary, the solution
to (4.2) is not unique unless we restrict attention to non-negative solutions.)
    The formal definition for SLE(κ; ρ) with one force point (i.e., ρ1 = ρ and
ρ2 = 0) was given in [LSW03]. It was observed there that in this case, (1.5)
implies that the process Wt − xt satisfies the same SDE as the Bessel process
of dimension δ = 1 + 2(ρ+2)
                          κ
                              up until the first time t for which Wt = xt . Thus,
to define SLE(κ; ρ), the paper [LSW03] starts with a constant multiple of a
Bessel process Zt of the appropriate
                                Rt       dimension and defines the evolution of
the force point xt by xt = x0 + 0 2 ds/Zs and the driving term by Wt = xt +Zt .
    Defining SLE(κ; ρ1 , ρ2 ) is a slightly more delicate matter since neither
Wt − xt nor yt − Wt is exactly a Bessel (although each one is quite close to
a Bessel when the other force point is relatively far away). Although this
is not a very difficult issue, it seems that there does not yet exist in the
literature an adequate definition of SLE(κ; ρ1 , ρ2 ) that is valid beyond the
time that the driving term hits a force point. Since we prove the convergence
to SLE(κ; ρ1 , ρ2 ), we have to define it.
    The approach we adopt is basically similar to the way in which the Bessel
process (and hence SLE(κ; ρ)) is usually defined: we pass to a coordinate
system in which the corresponding SDE becomes tractable. We will describe
the coordinate change we use in Section 4.2. Within this new coordinate
system, we then prove the convergence of the Loewner driving parameters of
our discrete processes to those of the corresponding SLE(κ; ρ1 , ρ2 ) in Sections

                                       94
4.3 and 4.4. Section 4.5 then describes the reverse coordinate transformation
and use it to give a formal definition of SLE(κ; ρ1 , ρ2 ), Definition 4.14.
    We remark that there are many equivalent ways to define SLE(κ; ρ1 , ρ2 )
(for example, one can probably show directly that (1.5) has a unique strong
solution for which xt ≤ Wt ≤ yt for all t), but ours seems most efficient given
that the coordinate change also simplifies the proofs in Sections 4.3 and 4.4.

4.2    A coordinate change
In this subsection, we recall a different coordinate system for Loewner evolu-
tions, which is virtually identical to the setup used in [LSW02, §3]. Suppose
that γ : [0, ∞) → H is a continuous simple path that starts at γ(0) = 0,
does not hit R r {0}, satisfies limt→∞ |γ(t)| = ∞ and is parameterized by
half-plane capacity from ∞. Let gt : H r γ[0, t] → H be the conformal map
satisfying the hydrodynamic normalization at ∞, let Wt = gt (γ(t)) be the
corresponding Loewner driving term. Loewner’s theorem says that gt sat-
isfies Loewner’s chordal equation (1.3). Now we introduce a one parameter
family of maps G∗t : H r γ[0, t] → H satisfying the normalization for t > 0

  G∗t (∞) = ∞ ,      G∗t ((0, ∞)) = (1, ∞) ,         G∗t ((−∞, 0)) = (−∞, −1) .

That is,
                                      2 gt (z) − xt − yt
                          G∗t (z) =                      ,                  (4.3)
                                            yt − xt
where xt and yt (as defined earlier) are the two images under gt of 0 and
xt < yt . Set
                                        2 Wt − xt − yt
                    Wt∗ := G∗t (γ(t)) =                .
                                           yt − xt
By differentiating (4.3) and using (1.3) and (1.4) it is immediate to verify
that G∗t satisfies

              dG∗t (z)       8                1 − G∗t (z)2
                       =                                            .
                dt       (yt − xt )2 (G∗t (z) − Wt∗ )(1 − (Wt∗ )2 )

We now define a new time parameter

                  s(t) = log(yt − xt ) = log 2 − log G∗t ′ (∞) .



                                         95
                                                                              
It is easy to verify that s is continuous and monotone increasing and s (0, ∞) =
(−∞, ∞). Set Gs = G∗t and W̃s = Wt∗ when s = s(t). Differentiation gives
                                    8 (yt − xt )−2 dt
                             ds =                     .                    (4.4)
                                       1 − (Wt∗ )2
Consequently, this change of time variable allows us to write the ODE satis-
fied by G as
                          dGs (z)    1 − Gs (z)2
                                  =              ,                     (4.5)
                             ds     Gs (z) − W̃s
where all the terms come from the new coordinate system. Later, in sub-
section 4.5, we explain how to go back to the standard chordal coordinate
system.

4.3    The Loewner evolution of the DGFF interface
In addition to our previous assumptions (h) and (D) about the domain D
and the boundary conditions, we now add the assumption that
(ab) there are constants a, b such that h∂ = b on ∂+ , h∂ = −a on ∂− and
     min{a, b} > −Λ0 , where Λ0 > 0 is given by Lemma 3.9 with Λ̄ :=
     max{|a|, |b|}.
In this case, clearly (∂) holds. In the following, a and b will be considered as
constants, and the dependence of various constants on a and b will sometimes
be suppressed (for example, when using the O(·) notation).
     Let φ : D → H be a conformal map that corresponds ∂+ with the positive
real ray. Let γ be the zero height interface of h joining the endpoints of ∂+ ,
and let γ φ denote the image of γ under φ. Now, γ φ satisfies the assumptions
in the previous subsection. Consequently, we may parameterize γ φ according
to the time parameter s = s(t) and consider the conformal maps Gs : H r
γ φ (−∞, s] → H as defined in §4.2. As above, we set W̃s = Gs (γ φ (s)) and
have the differential equation (4.5). Our goal now is to determine the limit
of the law of W̃ as radφ−1 (i) (D) → ∞. Set for x ∈ [−1, 1],
                                        λ+a            λ+b
   q1 (x) := 2 (1 − x2 ),    q2 (x) := −    (x − 1) −       (x + 1) . (4.6)
                                         2λ             2λ
We extend the definitions of q1 and q2 to all of R by taking each qj to be
constant in each of the two intervals (−∞, −1] and [1, ∞). Consider the SDE
                        dYs = q2 (Ys ) ds + q1 (Ys )1/2 dBs ,              (4.7)

                                         96
where B is a standard one-dimensional Brownian motion. A weak solution
is known to exist (see [KS88, §5.4.D]). We also recall that the weak solution
is strong and pathwise unique (see [RY99, §IX, Theorems 1.7 & 3.5]).

Theorem 4.1. There is a time-stationary solution Y : (−∞, ∞) → [−1, 1]
of (4.7). Moreover, for every finite S > 1 and ǫ > 0 there is an R0 = R0 (S, ǫ)
such that if R := radφ−1 (i) (D) > R0 and the assumptions (h), (D) and (ab)
hold, then there is a coupling of Ys with h such that
                    h                                i
                  P sup |Ys − W̃s : s ∈ [−S, S] > ǫ < ǫ .

    The following proposition is key in the proof of the theorem. In essence,
it states that W̃s satisfies a discrete version of (4.7). Let Fs be the σ-field
generated by (W̃r : r ≤ s). (Note that although the filtration defining W̃s
is discrete, there is no problem in considering Fs for arbitrary s, though the
behavior of W̃r for r in some neighborhood of s might be determined by Fs .)

Proposition 4.2. Assume (h), (D) and (ab). Fix some S > 1 large and
some δ, η > 0 small. There is a constant C > 0, depending only on a, b and
S, and there is a function R0 = R0 (S, δ, η), depending only on a, b, S, δ and
η, such that the following holds. If R := radφ−1 (i) (D) > R0 and s0 , s1 are two
stopping times for W̃s such that a.s. −S ≤ s0 ≤ s1 ≤ S, ∆s := s1 − s0 ≤ δ 2
and sups∈[s0,s1 ] |W̃s − W̃s0 | ≤ δ, then the following two estimates hold with
probability at least 1 − η

                      E ∆W̃ − q2 (W̃s0 ) ∆s Fs0 ≤ C δ 3 ,
                                                
                                                                           (4.8)

                    E (∆W̃ )2 − q1 (W̃s0 ) ∆s Fs0 ≤ C δ 3 ,
                                                
                                                                           (4.9)

where ∆W̃ := W̃s1 − W̃s0 .

   To prepare for the proof of the proposition, we need the following easy
lemma. The first two statements in this lemma should be rather obvious to
anyone with a solid background on conformal mappings.

Lemma 4.3. Set c1 = c1 (S) = 100 eS . There are finite constants c2 =
c2 (S) > 0 and R0 = R0 (S) > 0, depending only on S, such that if R :=
radφ−1 (i) (D) > R0 and if z ∈ H satisfies 5 c1 ≥ Im z ≥ c1 ≥ |Re z|, then the
following holds true:

                                       97
   1. radφ−1 (z) (D) > c2 R,

   2. there is a T G vertex v ∈ D satisfying |φ(v) − z| < |z|/100,

   3. Im Gs (z) ≥ e−s c1 /2 for s ∈ [−S, S] (and in particular, Gs (z) is well
      defined in that range), and

   4. |Gs (z) − 2 e−s z| ≤ 2 for s ∈ [−S, S].

Proof. Consider the conformal map ψ(z) = (z − i)/(z + i) from H onto
the unit disk U taking i to 0 and set f = (ψ ◦ φ)−1 . The Schwarz lemma
applied to the map z 7→ f −1 f (0) + R z restricted to U gives 1/|f ′(0)| =
|(f −1)′ (f (0))| ≤ 1/R. Thus |f ′ (0)| ≥ R. For a fixed c1 the set of possible
z is a compact subset of H, and its image under ψ is a compact subset of
U. Consequently, the Koebe distortion theorem (see, e.g., [Pom92, Theorem
1.3]) implies that |f ′ (ψ(z))| ≥ c′2 R for some c′2 depending only on c1 . Now the
Koebe 1/4 theorem (see, e.g., [Pom92, Corollary 1.4]) gives radf (ψ(z)) (D) >
c2 R for some c2 depending on c1 . This takes care of Statement 1.
    Let B be the open disk of radius |z|/200 about z. Clearly, B ⊂ H. We
conclude from |f ′ (ψ(z))| ≥ c′2 R that |(φ−1 )′ (z)| > c′′2 R for some c′′2 depending
only on c1 . Thus, the Koebe 1/4 theorem implies

                      radφ−1 (z) (φ−1 (B)) ≥ c′′2 rad(B) R/4 .

Consequently, Statement 2 holds once R0 > 4/(c′′2 rad(B)). This takes care
of 2, because 1/ rad(B) is bounded by a function of c1 .
    It is easy to check that 3 follows from 4. It remains to prove the latter.
Let xt and yt be as in §4.2. Note that xt < Wt < yt for all t > 0 and
limtց0 xt = W0 = 0 = limtց0 yt . Therefore, (1.4) implies xt < 0 < yt for all
t > 0. By (1.4),

                                        2 (yt − xt )          8
                 ∂t (yt − xt ) =                         ≥         .
                                   (yt − Wt ) (Wt − xt )   yt − xt

Therefore, ∂t (yt − xt )2 ≥ 16, which gives
                         


                                     e2 s(t) ≥ 16 t .                          (4.10)

   Observe by (1.3)
                               ∂t (Im gt (z))2 ≥ −4 .
                                              


                                           98
                  2
Thus, Im gt (z)        ≥ (Im z)2 − 4 t ≥ c21 − 4 t. Another appeal to (1.3) now
gives
                                              2t
                               gt (z) − z ≤ p 2       .
                                             c1 − 4 t
By (4.3) and the definition of s(t), the above gives

                                            xt + yt   2 t e−s
                       Gs (z) − 2 e−s z ≤           +p 2        .
                                            yt − xt    c1 − 4 t

Now, the first summand on the right hand side is at most 1, because yt >
0 > xt . The second summand is also at most 1 in the range s ∈ [−S, S],
by (4.10) and the choice of c1 . This completes the proof of the lemma.

Proof of Proposition 4.2. With the notations of Lemma 4.3, let zj :=
2 c1 i + c1 j/2, j = 0, 1, and let vj be a T G-vertex satisfying Condition 2
of the lemma with zj in place of z. Then zj′ := φ(vj ) satisfies in turn the
assumptions required of z in the lemma. For k = 0, 1, note that there is a
stopping time Tk for γ such that φ ◦ γ(Tk ) = γ φ (sk ). Fix j ∈ {0, 1} and set
                                             
                  Xk = Xk (j) := E h(vj ) Fsk ,        k = 0, 1.

Clearly,                                  
                                 E X1 F s 0 = X0 .                       (4.11)
Recall the definition of the function FT from Proposition 3.27. Let Ak be
the event |Xk − FTk (vj )| ≥ δ 5 . By that proposition and the fact that zj′
satisfies
    Condition     1 of Lemma 4.3, if R is chosen sufficiently large then
             5
P Ak < η δ /4. Since FTk (vj ) = Oa,b (1), and likewise Xk = Oa,b (1) by (3.2),
we get
              E X1 − FT1 (vj ) Fs0 ≤ δ 5 + Oa,b (1) P A1 Fs0 .
                                                           

                          P A1 Fs0 > δ 5 . Then P Ã < η/4 (since we are
                                                    
Let Ã be the
             event
                 that
assuming P A1 < η δ 5 /4) and we have

                E X1 − FT1 (vj ) Fs0 ≤ Oa,b(δ 5 )
                                   
                                                           on ¬Ã .

Thus, we have from (4.11)

      E FT1 (vj ) Fs0 − FT0 (vj ) = Oa,b (δ 5 )
                    
                                                      on ¬(Ã ∪ A0 ) .   (4.12)

                                            99
Let Hk be the bounded function that is harmonic (not discrete harmonic)
in D r γ[0, Tk ], has boundary values b on ∂+ , −a on ∂− , +λ on the right
hand side of γ[0, Tk ], and −λ on the left hand side of γ[0, Tk ]. We claim
that Hk (vj ) − FTk (vj ) is small if dist(vj , ∂D ∪ γ[0, Tk ]) is large. Indeed,
this easily follows by coupling the simple random walk on T G to stay with
high probability relatively close to a Brownian motion and using (3.54)
and Lemmas 3.23 and 2.1 to show that with high probability the bound-
ary value sampled by the hitting point of the Brownian motion is the same
as that sampled by the hitting vertex of the simple random walk. Now,
Lemma 3.24 guarantees that if R is sufficiently large, then with high prob-
ability dist(vj , ∂D ∪ γ[0, Tk ]) is large as well. Consequently,    if R is chosen
                                                          5        5
                                                            
sufficiently large we have P |Hk (vj ) − FTk (vj )| ≥ δ < η δ /4. Let Bk be
the event |Hk (vj ) − FTk (vj )| ≥ δ 5 , let B̃ be the event P B1 Fs0 ≥ δ 5 and
                                                                        

let Ā := A0 ∪ Ã ∪ B0 ∪ B̃. Note that P[Ā] < η. The above proof of (4.12)
from (4.11) now gives
                E H1 (vj ) Fs0 − H0 (vj ) = Oa,b (δ 5 )
                                
                                                              on ¬Ā .         (4.13)
    Now, the point is that Hk (vj ) caneasily be expressed analytically in terms
of Zk = Zk,j := Gsk (zj′ ) = Gsk φ(vj ) and W̃sk . Indeed, conformal invariance
implies that the harmonic measure of ∂+ in D r γ[0, Tk ] from vj is the same
as the harmonic measure of [1, ∞) from Zk , which is 1 − arg(Zk − 1)/π,
because Gs ◦ φ corresponds ∂+ with [1, ∞). Likewise, the harmonic    measure
of the right hand side of γ[0, Tk ] is arg(Zk − 1) − arg(Zk − W̃sk ) /π. Similar
expressions hold for the harmonic measure of the left hand side of γ[0, Tk ]
and of ∂− . These give
π (Hk (vj ) − b) = (λ − b) arg(Zk − 1) − 2 λ arg(Zk − W̃sk ) + (λ − a) arg(Zk + 1).
                                                                            (4.14)
   Recall that Zk = Gsk (zj′ ). By (4.5), we have in the interval s ∈ [s0 , s1 ]
                                            1 − Gr (zj′ )2
                                       Z s
                            ′
                       Gs (zj ) = Z0 +          ′
                                                           dr .             (4.15)
                                        s0 Gr (zj ) − W̃r

Note that Conditions 3 and 4 of Lemma 4.3 imply that the integrand is
OS (1). Therefore Gs (zj′ ) − Z0 = OS (∆s) = OS (δ 2 ) for s ∈ [s0 , s1 ]. Moreover,
we have |W̃s − W̃s0 | ≤ δ in that range. Thus, it follows from (4.15) and
Condition 3 of the lemma that
                   1 − Z2                      1 − Z02
                              0
    Z1 − Z0 = ∆s                 + OS (δ) = ∆s               + OS (δ 3 ) .    (4.16)
                    Z0 − W̃s0                  Z0 − W̃s0

                                        100
We will now write an expression for H1 (vj ) − H0 (vj ) and then use (4.13)
to complete the proof. Let us first look at the term arg(Zk − W̃sk ) on the
right hand side of (4.14), and see how it changes from k = 0 to k = 1. For
this purpose, we expand log(Z − W̃ ) in Taylor series up to first order in
Z − Z0 and up to second order in W̃ − W̃s0 (since Z1 − Z0 = OS (δ 2 ) while
W̃s1 − W̃s0 = O(δ)), as follows:
                                                                              
    arg(Z1 − W̃s1 ) − arg(Z0 − W̃s0 ) = Im log(Z1 − W̃s1 ) − log(Z0 − W̃s0 )
                        Z −Z
                           1    0     W̃s1 − W̃s0   (W̃s1 − W̃s0 )2 
                = Im               −              −                   + OS (δ 3 ) .
                         Z0 − W̃s0     Z0 − W̃s0    2 (Z0 − W̃s0 ) 2


Similar (but simpler) expansions apply to the other arguments in (4.14). We
use these expansions as well as (4.14) and (4.16) to write
                                                  ∆s (1 − Z02 )    
           π (H1 (vj ) − H0 (vj )) = (λ − b) Im                       +
                                               (Z0 − W̃s0 )(Z0 − 1)
                          ∆s (1 − Z 2 ) − ∆W̃ (Z − W̃ ) − (∆W̃ )2 /2 
                                    0            0        s0
                − 2 λ Im                                                +
                                           (Z0 − W̃s0 ) 2
                                  ∆s (1 − Z02 )    
                + (λ − a) Im                          + OS (δ 3 ) .
                               (Z0 − W̃s0 )(Z0 + 1)

With the abbreviations x̃ := Re (Z0 − W̃s0 ), y := Im Z0 , the above simplifies
to
π
  (H1 (vj ) − H0 (vj )) =
λ
      2 y  x̃                                                      
                        ∆s q1 (W̃s0 ) − (∆W̃ ) + ∆s q2 (W̃s0 ) − ∆W̃ + OS (δ 3 ) .
                                              2
                                                
    2     2   2
  x̃ + y x̃ + y      2


We know from (4.13) that on ¬Ā the conditioned expectation given Fs0 of
the left hand side is Oa,b (δ 5 ). Since (x̃2 + y 2)/y = OS (1) (by Statement 4 of
Lemma 4.3), we have on ¬Ā
    h       x̃                                                      i
                 ∆s q1 (W̃s0 ) − (∆W̃ )2 + ∆s q2 (W̃s0 ) − ∆W̃   Fs0 = Oa,b,S (δ 3 ) .
                                        
E         2    2
        x̃ + y
                                                                      (4.17)
     Now, this is valid for zj′ , with j = 0, 1.
                                           The choice of j only affects the
left hand side in the term x̃/(x̃ + y ). By the choice of the points zj′ and
                                     2   2



                                           101
by Statement 4 of Lemma 4.3, the factor x̃/(x̃2 + y 2 ) = Re (Z0 − W̃s0 )−1
                                                                            

differs between the two zj′ by an amount that is bounded away from zero by
a constant depending on S. Subtracting the above relation (4.17) for z0′ from
that of z1′ , we therefore get (4.9) on ¬Ā. When this is used in conjunction
with (4.17) again, one obtains (4.8) on ¬Ā. This concludes the proof of the
proposition.


4.4     Approximate diffusions
In this subsection we embark on the general study of random processes satis-
fying the conclusions of Proposition 4.2 and show that the proposition essen-
tially characterizes the macroscopic behavior of the process. As one of the
referees of this paper pointed out, one can try to do this more “traditionally”
by proving tightness of the driving term and characterizing the subsequen-
tial fine mesh limit using the appropriate martingale problem. However, our
approach is somewhat different (though not necessarily better). Motivated
by the proposition, we say that a continuous random W : [0, S] → [−1, 1]
is a (C, δ, η)-approximate (q1 , q2 )-diffusion if it satisfies the conclusion of the
proposition; namely, for every pair of stopping times s0 and s1 such that a.s.
0 ≤ s0 ≤ s1 ≤ S, ∆s := s1 − s0 ≤ δ 2 and sups∈[s0 ,s1 ] |Ws − Ws0 | ≤ δ we have
with probability at least 1 − η that (4.8) and (4.9) hold with W in place of
W̃ .
Lemma 4.4. Suppose that a, b ≥ −λ and that Ys satisfies (4.7), where q1
and q2 given by (4.6). Suppose that Y0 ∈ [−1, 1] a.s. Then there is a C > 0
such that Ys is a (C, δ, 0)-approximate (q1 , q2 )-diffusion for every δ ∈ (0, 1)
and in every time interval [0, S].
Proof. First, note that q1 (x) = 0 and x q2 (x) ≤ 0 for |x| ≥ 1. This clearly
implies that {Ys : s ≥ 0} ⊂ [−1, 1] a.s. Now fix some δ > 0 and two stopping
times s0 ≤ s1 satisfying the assumptions in the definition of approximate
diffusions. Let Fs0 denote the σ-field generated by (Ys : s ≤ s0 ). Then
                            Z s               Z s
                 Ys − Ys0 =     q2 (Yr ) dr +     q1 (Yr )1/2 dBr .
                                s0                 s0

The second summand is a martingale, and therefore
                                  hZ s1                i
              E Ys1 − Ys0 Fs0 = E         q2 (Ys ) ds Fs0 .
                                              s0


                                        102
Since |Ys − Ys0 | ≤ δ for s ∈ [s0 , s1 ] and q2 is a Lipschitz function, we conclude
that
                                                                      
        E Ys1 − Ys0 Fs0 = E ∆s q2 (Ys0 ) Fs0 + O(δ) E ∆s Fs0 .

Thus, Ys satisfies (4.8).
  We now use Itô’s formula to calculate (Ys1 − Ys0 )2 :
                  Z s1
             2
 (Ys1 − Ys0 ) =        2 (Ys − Ys0 ) dYs + hY is1 − hY is0
                   s0
  Z s1                            Z s1                             Z s1
                                                            1/2
=      2 (Ys −Ys0 ) q2 (Ys ) ds +      2 (Ys −Ys0 ) q1 (Ys ) dBs +      q1 (Ys ) ds .
     s0                              s0                                  s0

The left summand is O(δ 3 ) and the middle summand is a martingale and
therefore its expectation given Fs0 is zero. Thus
                           hZ s1            i
               2
                                 q1 (Ys ) ds + O(δ 3) = E ∆s q1 (Ys0 ) + O(δ 3) ,
                                                                   
E (Ys1 − Ys0 ) Fs0 = E
                                s0

because q1 is Lipschitz. This shows that Ys satisfies (4.9), and completes the
proof.

Proposition 4.5. Fix S > 2. Let q1 , q2 : [−1, 1] → R be defined as in (4.6),
where we assume that a, b > −λ. Suppose that W 1 is a (C, δ, η)-approximate
(q1 , q2 )-diffusion W 1 : [0, S] → [−1, 1] and W 2 : [0, S] → [−1, 1] is a so-
lution of (4.7) with the same q1 and q2 and W 1 (0) = W 2 (0) a.s. Also
assume η < δ 5 /S 2 . Then there is a coupling of W 1 and W 2 such that
sups∈[0,S−1] |Ws1 − Ws2 | → 0 in probability as δ → 0 while C is fixed. Namely,
for every ǫ > 0 there is a δ0 > 0, depending only on a, b, S, C and ǫ such that
sups∈[0,S−1] |Ws1 − Ws2 | ≤ ǫ with probability at least 1 − ǫ if δ < δ0 .
   A useful tool in the proof of the proposition is the following lemma.
Lemma 4.6. Let W be a (C, δ, η)-approximate (q1 , q2 )-diffusion, W : [0, S] →
[−1, 1], and let τ0 and τ1 be two stopping times for W satisfying 0 ≤ τ0 ≤
τ1 ≤ S. Assume that C δ < 1/2. Let f : [−1, 1] → R be a function whose
second derivative is Lipschitz with Lipschitz constant 1 and which satisfies
kf ′ k∞ , kf ′′ k∞ ≤ 1. Set
                                  1
                      Lf (x) :=     q1 (x) f ′′ (x) + q2 (x) f ′ (x) .
                                  2
                                           103
Then there is a stopping time τ1′ satisfying τ0 ≤ τ1′ ≤ τ1 a.s. and P τ1′ 6= τ1 ≤
                                                                              

η such that

   h                       Z τ1′                 i
  E f (Wτ1′ ) − f (Wτ0 ) −       Lf (Ws ) ds Fτ0
                            τ0
                                           = O(C + 1) δ E δ 2 + τ1′ − τ0 Fτ0 .
                                                                           


Moreover, in the above the function f may be random, provided that it is Fτ0
measurable.

Proof. We inductively define the stopping times sj as follows. Set s0 := τ0 ,
and sj+1 := min{s ≥ sj : s = sj + δ 2 or |Ws − Wsj | = δ or sj = τ1 }. If there
is a j ∈ N such that W does not satisfy (4.8) or (4.9) for the stopping times
(sj , sj+1 ) in place of (s0 , s1 ), then let n be the minimal such j. (Note that the
event that W does not satisfy (4.8) or (4.9) for (sj , sj+1) is Fsj -measurable.)
Otherwise, let n be the minimal j such that sj = τ1 . Note that (sn , sn+1) is
a pair of stopping times and they do not satisfy both (4.8) and (4.9) unless
sn = τ1 . Consequently,                         
                                       P sn 6= τ1 ≤ η .                        (4.18)
Since |Wsj+1 − Wsj | ≤ δ using a Taylor series for f around Wsj we have

   f (Wsj+1 ) − f (Wsj ) = f ′ (Wsj ) ∆j W + (1/2) f ′′(Wsj ) (∆j W )2 + O(δ 3 ) ,

where ∆j W := Wsj+1 − Wsj . We may use (4.8) and (4.9) to estimate the
conditioned expectation of ∆j W and (∆j W )2 given Fsj and get for j < n

  E f (Wsj+1 ) − f (Wsj ) Fsj = Lf (Wsj ) E sj+1 − sj Fsj + O(1 + C) δ 3 .
                                                      


By our assumptions about f this may also be written as
        h                       Z sj+1                i
      E f (Wsj+1 ) − f (Wsj ) −        Lf (Ws ) ds Fsj = O(1 + C) δ 3.
                                   sj

We sum this over j from 0 to n − 1, then take expectations conditioned on
Fτ0 , to obtain
      h                    Z sn                i
                                Lf (Ws ) ds Fτ0 = O(1 + C) δ 3 E n Fτ0 .
                                                                     
   E f (Wsn ) − f (Wτ0 ) −
                             τ0
                                                                               (4.19)

                                        104
Now fix some j ∈ N. On the event j + 1 < n, we have (∆j W )2 = δ 2 or
sj+1 − sj = δ 2 . Therefore,
         h                              i
       E (∆j W )2 + sj+1 − sj 1{j<n} Fsj ≥ δ 2 P j + 1 < n Fsj .
                                                            

By (4.9), this gives
   h                                    i
 E 1 + q1 (Wsj ) (sj+1 − sj ) 1{j<n} Fsj
                                     ≥ δ 2 P j + 1 < n Fsj − C δ 3 1{j<n} .
                                                         

We take expectation conditioned on Fτ0 and use the fact that q1 is bounded,
to obtain
                                
  O(1) E (sj+1 − sj ) 1{j<n} Fτ0
                            ≥ δ 2 P j + 1 < n Fτ0 − C δ 3 P j < n Fτ0 .
                                                                     

We sum this over all j ∈ N, to get
       O(1) E sn − τ0 Fτ0 ≥ δ 2 (1 − C δ) E n − 1 Fτ0 − C δ 3 .
                                                  

By our assumption that C δ < 1/2, this implies
               O(1) E δ 2 + sn − τ0 Fτ0 ≥ δ 2 E n Fτ0 .
                                                  

When combined with (4.19), this gives
  h                      Z sn                 i
 E f (Wsn ) − f (Wτ0 ) −      Lf (Ws ) ds Fτ0
                           τ0
                                        = O(1 + C) δ E δ 2 + sn − τ0 Fτ0 .
                                                                       

By (4.18), this completes the proof with τ1′ = sn .
   The next lemma bounds the expected time that Ws spends close to ±1.
Lemma 4.7. Let W be a (C, δ, η)-approximate (q1 , q2 )-diffusion W : [0, S] →
[−1, 1], where q1 and q2 are given by (4.6), C δ < 1/2 and b > −λ. Suppose
that S ≥ 1. Given any ǫ > 0 there is some x0 < 1, δ ′ > 0 and η ′ > 0 all
depending only on ǫ, a, b and S such that if δ < δ ′ and η < η ′ , then
                             hZ S              i
                           E      1{Ws >x0 } ds < ǫ .
                                0

A similar statement holds for the set of times such that Ws is near −1,
provided that a > −λ.

                                     105
                             hR             i
                                 S
Proof. Set µ(A) := E 0 1{Ws ∈A} ds . Note that q2 (1) < 0. Fix some
y0 ∈ [0, 1) such that q2 (x) ≤ q2 (1)/2 throughout [y0 , 1] and set yn := 1 − (1 −
y0 ) 2−n . Let f (x) be the twice continuously differentiable function that is
zero on [−1, y0 ], satisfies f ′′ (x) = min{x − y0 , y1 − x} on [y0 , y1 ] and satisfies
f ′′ (x) = 0 on [y1 , 1]. We apply Lemma 4.6 with to f with τ0 = 0 and
τ1 = S. Clearly Lf (x) = 0 in [−1, y0 ]. On the interval [y0 , y1 ], we have
f ′′ (x) ≤ (y1 − y0 )/2, f ′ (x) ≥ 0 and q2 (x) < 0. Consequently, Lf (x) ≤
q1 (x)(y1 − y0 )/4 ≤ (1 − x)(y1 − y0 ) ≤ (1 − y0 )2 on [y0 , y1]. On the interval
[y1 , 1], we have f ′′ (x) = 0, f ′ (x) = (y1 − y0 )2 /4 and q2 (x) ≤ q2 (1)/2 < 0.
Consequently, Lf (x) ≤ −c (1−y0)2 , where c > 0 depends only on q2 (1). Also
note that
       |f (WS ) − f (W0 )| ≤ sup f (x) − inf f (x) = f (1) − 0 ≤ (1 − y0 )3 .
                                  x            x

Therefore, Lemma 4.6 gives

  (1 − y0 )2 µ([y0 , y1 )) − c (1 − y0 )2 µ([y1 , 1])
                                          ≥ −(1 − y0 )3 + O(C + 1) δ S + O(S) η .
We assume that δ ′ and η ′ are sufficiently small so that the right hand side is
larger than −2 (1 − y0 )3 . Then we get
                         c µ([y1, 1]) ≤ 2 (1 − y0 ) + µ([y0, y1 )) .
This implies
                      µ([y1 , 1]) ≤ 2 (1 − y0 ) + µ([y0 , 1])/(1 + c) .
A similar inequality applies to yn and yn+1 . Induction therefore gives
                                   n−1
                       µ([y0, 1]) X                   µ([y0, 1])
        µ[yn , 1] ≤              +     2 (1 − y j ) <            + 4 (1 − y0 ) ,
                       (1 + c)n    j=0
                                                      (1 +  c) n


provided that δ ′ and η ′ are smaller than some functions of n, S, C and y0 .
Consequently, we first choose y0 such that in addition to the requirements
stated in the beginning of the proof, 4 (1 − y0 ) ≤ ǫ/2. Then we take n
sufficiently large so that (1 − c)−n S < ǫ/2. Then δ ′ and η ′ are determined.
This proves the first claim. The second one follows by symmetry.
   The next lemma estimates the conditional expectation and conditional
second moment of the time it takes Ws to move a distance of δ beyond its
location at a stopping time.

                                            106
Lemma 4.8. Let W be a (C, δ, η)-approximate (q1 , q2 )-diffusion W : [0, S] →
[−1, 1], where q1 and q2 are given by (4.6) and S > 1. Let x0 ∈ (0, 1). There
is a function δ0 > 0, depending only on x0 , C, a and b such that the following
             δ0 ∧ (1/2) and η < δ 5 /S 2 . Let τ0 be a stopping time for W and
holds if δ < 
let τ1 := inf s ≥ τ0 : s = S or |Ws − Wτ0 | = δ . Let A denote the event
{τ0 < S − 1/2} ∩ {|Wτ0 | < x0 }. Then
          h                                     i
         E E[τ1 − τ0 | Fτ0 ] − δ 2 /q1 (Wτ0 ) 1A = Ox0 (C + 1) δ 3 .      (4.20)

Moreover,             h                        i
                     E E[(τ1 − τ0 )2 | Fτ0 ] 1A = Ox0 (δ 4 ) .                 (4.21)

Proof. Let f (x) = (x − Wτ0 )2 /4, and let L be as in Lemma 4.6. Then
Lf (x) = q1 (Wτ0 )/4 + O(δ) for x ∈ [Wτ0 − δ, Wτ0 + δ]. Therefore, Lemma 4.6
gives

 E f (Wτ1′ ) − q1 (Wτ0 ) (τ1′ − τ0 )/4 Fτ0 = O(C + 1) δ E δ 2 + τ1′ − τ0 Fτ0 .
                                                                         

That is,
                  q1 (Wτ0 ) + O(C + 1) δ  ′
                                               E τ1 − τ0 Fτ0 = O(C + 1) δ 3.
                                                           
  E f (Wτ1′ ) Fτ0 −
                                   4
                                                                       (4.22)
By choosing δ0 sufficiently small, we make sure that O(C + 1) δ < q1 (Wτ0 )/2
on A. Since |f (Wτ1′ )| ≤ δ 2 /4, the above gives

                     P τ1′ = S Fτ0 1A = O(δ 2 )/q1 (Wτ0 ) .
                                     

Recall that f (Wτ1′ ) = δ 2 /4 unless τ1′ = S or τ1′ < τ1 . Therefore, on A,

        E f (Wτ1′ ) Fτ0 = δ 2 /4 + Ox0 (δ 4 ) + O(δ 2 ) P τ1′ < τ1 Fτ0 .
                                                                      

We plug this and

                   E τ1′ − τ1 Fτ0 = O(S) P τ1′ 6= τ1 Fτ0
                                                      

into (4.22), simplify, and get

  δ 2 − q1 (Wτ0 ) + O(C + 1) δ E τ1 − τ0 Fτ0
                                           

                             = Ox0 (C + 1) δ 3 + O(S) P τ1′ < τ1 Fτ0 . (4.23)
                                                                   


                                       107
on A. Now (4.20) follows by dividing
                                   ′ (4.23)
                                           by q1 (Wτ0 ) + O(C + 1) δ, taking
expectation and recalling that P τ1 6= τ1 ≤ η. 
   Now define tn := τ1 ∧ τ0 + 16 n δ 2/q1 (Wτ0 ) . If δ0 is sufficiently small,
then Lf (x) > Lf (Wτ0 )/2 = q1 (Wτ0 )/8 throughout [Wτ0 − δ, Wτ0 + δ] on the
event A. Thus, we get by applying Lemma 4.6 to the stopping times tn and
tn+1
      q1 (Wτ0 ) − O(C + 1) δ E t′n+1 − tn Ftn /8 ≤ δ 2 /4 + O(C + 1) δ 3,
                                            

where t′n+1 is the stopping time provided by the lemma. Again, on A we may
assume that O(C + 1) δ < (q1 (Wτ0 )/2) ∧ (1/4). Thus,
                     q1 (Wτ0 ) E t′n+1 − tn Ftn /16 ≤ δ 2 /2 ,
                                              

which implies
                  P t′n+1 = tn + 16 n δ 2/q1 (Wτ0 ) Ftn ≤ 1/2 .
                                                      

But if t′n+1 6= tn + 16 n δ 2/q1 (Wτ0 ), then t′n+1 = τ1 or t′n+1 6= tn+1 . If Bn
denotes the event that t′j = tj for all j = 1, . . . , n, then induction gives
                        P tn 6= τ1 , Bn Fτ0 1A ≤ 2−n .
                                              

Lemma 4.6 gives P t′n+1 6= tn+1 ≤ η and therefore
                                                                 
                                                          P  ¬B n   ≤ n η. (In fact,
it is not hard to get the better estimate P ¬Bn ≤ η.) Consequently for
n∈N
        P τ1 − τ0 > 16 n δ 2/q1 (Wτ0 ) Fτ0 1A ≤ 2−n + P ¬Bn Fτ0 .
                                                                         

The above applies with ñ := n ∧ ⌈− log2 η⌉ in place of n, and hence
     h           16 n δ 2      i
  P τ1 − τ0 >               Fτ0 1A
                q1 (Wτ0 )
                          h           16 ñ δ 2     i
                                                 Fτ0 1A ≤ 2−ñ + P ¬Bñ Fτ0 .
                                                                             
                    ≤ P τ1 − τ0 >
                                     q1 (Wτ0 )
                                                      2
We multiply both sides by 2 (n+1) 16 δ 2 /q1 (Wτ0 ) , and sum over n from n =
0 to the least m
                such that    16 m δ 2/q1 (Wτ0 ) ≥ S. The result on the left hand
side bounds E (τ1 − τ0 )2 Fτ0 1A . Consequently, the required bound (4.21)
                                 

follows by taking expectations and using our assumed upper bound for η.
    The following lemma shows that when we discretize the approximate dif-
fusion the resulting random walk has transition probabilities that can be well
estimated from q1 and q2 away from the boundary.

                                         108
Lemma 4.9. Fix some x0 ∈ (0, 1). Let W be a (C, δ, η)-approximate (q1 , q2 )-
diffusion W : [0, S] → [−1, 1], where q1 and q2 are given by (4.6), S ≥ 1 and
η ≤ δ 5 /S. Set              
                        Z := k δ : k ∈ Z, |k δ| < x0 ,
s0 := inf{s ≥ 0 : Ws ∈ Z or s = S} and inductively
                          
               sn+1 := inf s ≥ sn : Wsn 6= Ws ∈ Z or s = S .

Also set Xn := Wsn and Z 0 := Z r {min Z, max Z}. Let

                     p±
                                                
                      n := P Xn+1 = Xn ± δ Fsn

and
                                       1     q2 (Xn )
                              rn± :=     ±δ            .
                                       2    2 q1 (Xn )
There is a δ0 > 0, depending only on C, x0 , a and b, such that if δ < δ0 , then
for all n ∈ N
               h                                i
             E p± n − r ±
                        n 1                                     2
                            {sn <S−1/2} {Xn ∈Z } ≤ Ox0 (C + 1) δ .
                                       1      0



Proof. We now use a different test function:

                       f (x) := α (x − Xn )2 + β (x − Xn ) ,

where α := −q2 (Xn ) β/q1(Xn ) and β := |q1 (Xn )/(6 q2 (Xn ))| ∧ (1/3) with
β = 1/2 if q2 (Xn ) = 0. The choice of α and β above is tailored to give
Lf (Xn ) = 0 and |4 α| + |β| ≤ 1. The latter implies that kf ′′ k∞ , kf ′ k∞ ≤ 1
when f is restricted to the interval [−1, 1]. We now apply Lemma 4.6 again
with this f and stopping times sn and sn+1 . Note that Lf = O(δ) in the
interval [Xn −δ, Xn +δ]. Hence Lf (Ws ) = O(δ) for s ∈ [sn , sn+1 ]. Lemma 4.6
gives

     E f (Ws′n+1 ) − f (Wsn ) Fsn = O(C + 1) δ E δ 2 + s′n+1 − sn Fsn ,
                                                                        


on the event Xn ∈ Z 0 , where s′n+1 is the stopping time produced by the
lemma. The above may be written

  (β δ + α δ 2 ) p+               2     −
                                                                               
                  n + (−β δ + α δ   ) p n = −E  1{Ws′      ∈Z} f (Ws′n+1 )
                                                           /                 Fsn +
                                                   n+1

                                          + O(C + 1) δ E δ 2 + s′n+1 − sn Fsn .
                                                                            


                                         109
Set pon := P Ws′n+1 ∈/ {Xn − δ, Xn + δ} Fsn . Then 1 ≥ p+     −        o
                                           
                                                         n + pn ≥ 1 − pn .
Hence, the above gives

 (2 p+                    o               2
                                                                    
      n − 1) β + α δ = O(pn ) + O(C + 1) δ + O(C + 1) E sn+1 − sn Fsn ,

which, by the definitions of α and rn+ may be rewritten,

 2 β (p+    +         o               2
                                                               
       n − rn ) = O(pn ) + O(C + 1) δ + O(C + 1) E sn+1 − sn Fsn . (4.24)

By (4.20) and our assumption η ≤ δ 5 /S, we have
                E (sn+1 − sn ) 1Xn ∈Z 0 1sn <S−1/2 = Ox0 (δ 2 ) ,
                                                 
                                                                             (4.25)

                                                     / Z only when s′n+1 6= sn+1
provided that δ0 is sufficiently small. Since Ws′n+1 ∈
or s′n+1 = sn+1 = S, on the event {Xn ∈ Z 0 } ∩ {sn < S − 1/2},

    E pon Fsn ≤ P s′n+1 6= sn+1 Fsn + P s′n+1 ≥ sn + 1/2 Fsn
                                                                 
                                                                          (4.26)
                 ≤ P s′n+1 6= sn+1 Fsn + 2 E sn+1 − sn Fsn .
                                                             

Note that β −1 = Ox0 (1) and P s′n+1 6= sn+1 ≤ η. Hence, we now obtain the
                                             
                                                            0
result for p+
            n by taking expectation on the event {Xn ∈ Z } ∩ {sn < S − 1/2}
in (4.24) and using (4.25) and (4.26). A symmetric argument applies to p−      n
and rn− , and the proof is complete.
   Next, we show that the time parameterization of W can be well approx-
imated by a function of the discretized walk trajectory.
Lemma 4.10. Assume the setting and notation of Lemma 4.9 in addition
to δ < δ0 . For n ∈ N let tn denote the time spent up to time sn in segments
[sj , sj+1 ] such that Xj = Wsj ∈ Z 0 ; that is,
                                 n−1
                                 X
                         tn :=         1{Xj ∈Z 0 } (sj+1 − sj ) .
                                 j=0

Also let
                                 n−1
                                 X
                         σn :=         1{Xj ∈Z 0 } δ 2 /q1 (Xj ) .
                                 j=0

Let N0 := min{n ∈ N : sn ≥ S − 1/2}. Then for all n ∈ N

   E max{|σj − tj | : j = 1, 2, . . . , n ∧ N0 } ≤ Ox0 (C + 1) δ 2 n1/2 + δ 3 n .
                                                                             

                                                                              (4.27)

                                           110
                                                                       
Proof. Let vj := (sj+1 − sj ) 1{Xj ∈Z 0 } 1{j<N0 } , uj := E vj Fsj and wj :=
                                               Pn−1
δ 2 q1 (Xj )−1 1{Xj ∈Z 0 } 1{j<N0} . Now, Mn := j=0  (vj − uj ) is clearly a martin-
gale. Consequently, Doob’s maximal inequality for L2 martingales [RY99,
II.1.6] gives
                                                     n−1
                                 2        2       X
                                                         E (vj − uj )2 .
                                                                    
  E max{|Mj | : j = 1, . . . , n} ≤ O(1) E Mn = O(1)
                                                                     j=0

                                             2
                                                  2
Since  u j = E vj Fsj , we have E (vj − uj )     ≤ E  vj . By Lemma 4.8,
   2
E vj is bounded by the right hand side of (4.21). Now, the right hand
                                    
side of (4.20) bounds E |uj − wj | . The result follows by our assumption
η ≤ δ 5 /S 2 , since for every m ≤ n ∧ N0

                     m−1
                     X                            m−1
                                                  X
  |σm − tm | =             (vj − wj ) ≤ |Mm | +         |uj − wj |
                     j=0                          j=0
                                                                   n−1
                                                                   X
                                       
                                  ≤ max |Mj | : j = 1, . . . , n +     |uj − wj |.
                                                                      j=0


Proof of Proposition (4.5). By Lemma 4.4, W 2 is a (C ′ , δ, 0)-approximate
(q1 , q2 )-diffusion for some fixed constant C ′ > 0 and every δ > 0. We may
assume, with no loss of generality, that C ≥ C ′ . Let ǫ > 0. Let x′0 ∈ (1 − ǫ, 1)
satisfy Lemma 4.7 with this given ǫ, and assume that δ is sufficiently small
so that that lemma is valid. Take x0 = (1 + x′0 )/2. Let Z and Z 0 be as in
Lemma 4.9, let skj be the corresponding stopping times introduced there for
W k and let p±                                                           k
                  k,j denote the random transition probabilities for W defined
there. Also abbreviate Xjk := Wskj . Let Fsk denote the filtration of W k ,
k = 1, 2. Let Yjk = 1 if Xj+1     k
                                      − Xjk = δ, Yjk = −1 if Xj+1
                                                                k
                                                                      − Xjk = −δ
and Yjk = 0 if |Xj+1     k
                            − Xjk | 6= δ. Then P Yjk = ±1 Fskk = p±
                                                                   
                                                                  j
                                                                           k,j and

P Yj = 0 Fskk = 1 − p+              −       k    0
   k                
                 j
                             k,j − pk,j if Xj ∈ Z .
    For the coupling of W 1 and W 2 we use an i.i.d. sequence Uj of uniform
random variables in [0, 1]. The coupling proceeds as follows. Up to their
corresponding stopping times sk0 , k = 1, 2, let them run independently. In-
ductively, we suppose that the coupling has been constructed up to their
corresponding stopping times skj , k = 1, 2. For each k = 1, 2 we take Yjk = 1
if Uj ≤ p+       k                  −           k              +          −
         k,j , Yj = −1 if Uj ≥ 1 − pk,j , and Yj = 0 if Uj ∈ (pk,j , 1 − pk,j ). (In


                                            111
                                         1
other words, we try and match up Xj+1         −Xj1 with Xj+1 2
                                                                −Xj2 as much as pos-
sible.) These choices respect the correct conditional distributions for these
variables. Now we sample the restriction of W 1 to [s1j , s1j+1] and the restric-
tion of W 2 to [s2j , s2j+1 ] independently from their corresponding conditional
distribution given (Fs1j , Yj1 ) and (Fs2j , Yj2 ), respectively. This completes the
description of the coupling.
    Let N := min{n : s1n ∨s2n ≥ S −1/2}. Let Aj be the event {Xj1 , Xj2 ∈ Z 0 }
and set                                                  n
                                                        X
                Qj := 1Aj |Yj1 − Yj2 |,         Q̂n :=      Qj 1{j<N } .
                                                         j=0
                             1
Note that on ¬Aj we have |Xj+1     2
                               − Xj+1 | ≤ |Xj1 − Xj2 | unless s1j+1 ∨ s2j+1 = S.
Moreover, |X0 − X0 | ≤ δ and when Yj = 0 we have skj+1 = S. Consequently,
             1   2                  k



                    |Xn1 − Xn2 | 1{n<N } ≤ δ + δ Q̂n−1 .                          (4.28)
                                                  
We now proceed to estimate θj := E Qj 1{j<N } . Clearly,

        P Qj 6= 0 Fs11 ∨ Fs22 ≤ |p+           +         −      −
                                                                  
                            j      j
                                       1,j − p2,j | + |p1,j − p2,j | 1Aj .

     ±
Let rk,j be the rj± in Lemma 4.9 corresponding to the process W k . Then

             |p±      ±         ±      ±         ±      ±         ±      ±
               1,j − p2,j | ≤ |p1,j − r1,j | + |r1,j − r2,j | + |r2,j − p2,j |.

By that lemma,

                   E |p±      ±                                2
                                              
                       k,j − rk,j | 1Aj 1{j<N } ≤ Ox0 (C + 1) δ .

                                ±
Using the expression given for rk,j , we deduce that
                           ±      ±
                         |r1,j − r2,j | ≤ Ox0 (δ) |Xj1 − Xj2 | .

Thus, we get

    θn = E Qn 1{n<N } ≤ Ox0 (C + 1) δ 2 + Ox0 (δ) E |Xn1 − Xn2 | 1{n<N } .
                                                                     

In conjunction with (4.28), this gives
                                               n−1
                                                X     
                                                 2
                         θn ≤ Ox0 (C + 1) δ 1 +     θj .
                                                         j=0


                                           112
Induction therefore implies
                                                               n
                       θn ≤ Ox0 (C + 1) δ 2 1 + Ox0 (C + 1) δ 2 .

Taking note of (4.28), we infer
    h                 i                                         n
  E max |Xj1 − Xj2 | ≤ δ + Ox0 (C + 1) δ 3 n 1 + Ox0 (C + 1) δ 2 .                  (4.29)
      j<n∧N

Now let m0 := ⌈4 S δ −2 max{q1 (x) : |x| ≤ x0 }⌉. Observe that at least one
from every two consecutive j ∈ N satisfies Xjk ∈ Z 0 or skj = S. Consequently,
                   k
m0 < N implies σm    0
                       ≥ 2 S for k = 1, 2, where σjk denotes the σj from
Lemma 4.10 corresponding to W k . Note that in that lemma tj ≤ sj ≤ S.
Therefore, taking n = m0 in (4.27) implies
                                           1/2
     P N > m0 ≤ Ox0 (C + 1) S −1 δ 2 m0 + δ 3 m0 = Ox0 (C + 1) δ .
                                                    

Set X ∗ := maxj<N |Xj1 − Xj2 |. The above and (4.29) with n = m0 imply

                P X ∗ > δ 1/2 or N > m0 ≤ Ox0 ,C,S (δ 1/2 ).
                                         
                                                                    (4.30)

Now for each s ≤ S let J(s) := min{j ∈ N : s1j ≥ s}. Then

            sup |Ws1 − Ws2 | ≤              sup |Ws1 − XJ(s)
                                                        1
                                                             |+
          s∈[0,S−1]                       s∈[0,S−1]
                                 1       2
                                                                                    (4.31)
               +       sup     |XJ(s) − XJ(s) |+            sup |Ws2 − XJ(s)
                                                                        2
                                                                             |.
                   s∈[0,S−1]                            s∈[0,S−1]

First, it is clear that

                                sup |Ws1 − XJ(s)
                                            1
                                                 | ≤ ǫ+δ.
                              s∈[0,S−1]

(The left hand side is usually at most δ but can be as large as 1 − x0 + δ if,
for example, XJ(s)−1 = max Z = x0 .) We leave aside, for now, the estimation
of the second summand in (4.31) and consider the last. Set

                                 t∗ :=       sup       |s − s2J(s) |.
                                           s∈[0,S−1]

       2
Since XJ(s) = Ws22 , we have
                      J (s)


                 sup |Ws2 − XJ(s)
                             2
                                  |≤                  sup      sup |Ws2 − Ws+t
                                                                           2
                                                                               |.   (4.32)
              s∈[0,S−1]                         s∈[0,S−1] t∈[0,t∗ ]


                                                113
Observe from (4.27) that for k = 1, 2,

                    max |σjk − tkj | : j ≤ N ∧ m0 → 0,
                        

in probability as δ → 0, where tkj is the tj of Lemma 4.10 corresponding to
W k . Now the choice of x0 (via Lemma 4.7) implies that
                      h                        √i √
                     P max |sk0 + tkj − skj | > ǫ < ǫ .
                                   j∈N


Lemmas 4.7 and 4.8 imply that E sk0 ≤ ǫ ∨ Ox0 ,C (δ 2 ). Consequently, we
                                    

have
                   max{|σjk − skj | : j ≤ N ∧ m0 } → 0             (4.33)
in probability as ǫ, δ → 0. Now

                   n−1
                   X
  |σn1 − σn2 | ≤         1{Xj1 ∈Z 0 } δ 2 /q1 (Xj1 ) − 1{Xj2 ∈Z 0 } δ 2 /q1 (Xj2 )
                   j=0
                       n−1
                       X                                              n−1
                                                                    2 X
                                                                    X
                   ≤         δ /q1 (Xj1 ) − δ 2 /q1 (Xj2 )
                              2
                                                               +              1{Xjk /∈Z 0 } δ 2 /q1 (Xjk ) .
                       j=0                                          k=1 j=0

The right hand side is monotone non-decreasing in n. When n ≤ N ∧ m0
the first sum is at most Ox0 (δ 2 ) m0 X ∗ . It is easy to see that for n = N ∧ m0
the iterated sum on the right tends to 0 in probability: this follows from the
proof of (4.33), because if we replace x0 by x0 + δ, the terms appearing in
this iterated sum are included in σn . We now get from (4.30)

                   max |σj1 − σj2 | → 0            in probability as ǫ, δ → 0.
                   j≤N


By (4.33), this also gives

                   max |s1j − s2j | → 0           in probability as ǫ, δ → 0.
                   j≤N


In particular, (4.30) and (4.33) imply supj≤N −1 skj+1 − skj → 0 in probability,
          k
             −σjk ≤ Ox0 (δ 2 ). One consequence is that P J(S − 1) ≥ N → 0.
                                                                       
because σj+1
Furthermore, we now have

               t∗ ≤          sup     |s − s1J(s) | +     sup       |s2J(s) − s1J(s) | → 0
                         s∈[0,S−1]                     s∈[0,S−1]


                                                  114
in probability. Now (4.32) implies that sups∈[0,S−1] |Ws2 − XJ(s)2
                                                                     | → 0 in
probability, because the right hand side in (4.32) is smaller than (t∗ )1/3 with
probability going to 1 as t∗ → 0, since W 2 is a solution of (4.7). This takes
care of the last summand on the right hand side of (4.31).
   The middle summand on the right hand      side of (4.31)
                                                          also tends∗ to 0 in
probability because, as we have seen, P J(S − 1) < N → 1 and X → 0 in
probability. This completes the proof.
Proof of Theorem 4.1.             Let x1 , x2 ∈ [−1, 1] be two arbitrary points,
             1   2
and let Ys , Ys : [0, ∞) → [−1, 1] be two independent solutions of (4.7)
(with respect to two independent Brownian motions) which start at x1 and
x2 , respectively. We claim that s= := min{s : Ys1 = Ys2 } < ∞ a.s. The
argument is quite standard. Suppose without loss of generality that x2 >
x1 . By Lemma 4.7, it is unlikely that Ys2 stays very close to 1 for a long
time and unlikely that Ys1 stays very close to −1 for a long time. It is
therefore easy to conclude from Lemmas 4.8 and 4.9 that there  2 areconstants
s0, c0 > 0 (which   do not depend on x1 or x2 ) such that P Ys0 < 0 > c0 and
P Ys0 > 0 > c0 . This implies P s= < s0 > c20 . By strong uniqueness of
       1
             

solutions of (4.7), it follows that the solutions are Markov and have
                                                                    stationary
                                                                            
transition probabilities. Consequently, we get by induction P s= > n s0 <
(1 − c20 )n for all n ∈ N, which
                                     that s= < ∞ a.s.
                                  proves
     We now argue that P s= < ∞ = 1 and the uniqueness in law of solutions
of (4.7) implies that for every Borel subset A ⊂ [−1, 1] the limit
                              µ(A) := lim P Yr1 ∈ A
                                                     
                                      r→∞

exists. We may couple a solution started at some time s0 < r such that r −s0
is a large constant to be independent from Ys1 until the first time in [s0 , ∞)
in which they meet and to agree with Ys1 afterwards.Because these solutions
are likely to meet prior to time r, it follows that P Yr1 ∈ A is close to the
probability that the solution started at time s0 is in A at time r, proving the
existence of µ. (In our setting, µ may be explicitly described. Its density
with respect to Lebesgue measure is proportional to (1 + x)(b−λ)/(2λ) (1 −
x)(a−λ)/(2λ) .) Since solutions of (4.7) are Markov, a solution Ỹ : [0, ∞) →
[−1, 1] of (4.7) such that the distribution of Ỹ0 is given by µ is time-stationary.
To get a time-stationary solution Y : (−∞, ∞) → [−1, 1], we may take the
weak limit of time-translations of Ỹ .
    Now let S ′ be much larger than S. By Proposition 4.2 with S ′ instead
of S and Proposition 4.5 translated to start at time −S ′ and an appropriate

                                        115
choice of the S appearing there, we may couple W̃s so that with probability
close to 1 it stays close to a solution Ws2 of (4.7) starting at W̃−S ′ throughout
[−S ′ , S ′ ]. We may at the same time couple Ws2 so that with high probability
it agrees with Ys inside the interval [−S, S]. Then with high probability W̃s
stays close to Ys in [−S, S], which concludes the proof of the theorem.

Remark 4.11. At this point, it may be worthwhile to point out which proper-
ties of the functions q1 and q2 played a part in the proof. The only properties
that are essential for the above proof are that q1 and q2 are both Lipschitz
continuous in [−1, 1], that q1 > 0 in (−1, 1) and q1 = 0 on {−1, 1}, and that
q2 (1) < 0 < q2 (−1).

4.5    Back to chordal
In Subsection 4.2, we described the transition from the chordal Loewner
system to the setup with the points ±1 fixed. We now describe the reverse
transformation. We start with some continuous Y : (−∞, ∞) → [−1, 1]. Set

                             es     1 s u
                                     Z
                      ws := Ys +           e Yu du .               (4.34)
                             2      2 −∞

Also define
              Z s
  ∗       1
                    e2u 1 − Yu2 du ,       s∗ (t) := sup{s ∈ (−∞, ∞) : t∗ (s) ≤ t} .
                               
 t (s) :=
          8    −∞


Now set Ŷt := ws∗ (t) for t > 0, Ŷ0 := 0, and observe that Ŷ is continuous
provided that there is no nontrivial time interval in which Y ∈ {±1}.

Lemma 4.12. If Ys = W̃s is defined from Wt as in Subsection 4.2, then
Ŷt = Wt .

Proof. By the definition of s(t) in Subsection 4.2, we have es = yt − xt .
Consequently, (4.4) implies ∂t t∗ (s(t)) = 1. Since s(0) = −∞ and t∗ (−∞) =
0, it follows that t∗ (s(t)) = t for all t ≥ 0 and s∗ (t∗ (s)) = s for all s ∈
(−∞, ∞). Next, (1.4) and the definition of W ∗ give

                                                   8 Wt∗
                       ∂t (yt + xt ) =                          .
                                         (yt − xt ) 1 − (Wt∗ )2


                                           116
Since y0 = 0 = x0 , and W̃s(t) = Wt∗ this implies
                       Z t                                        Z s(t)
                                      8 W̃s(r)
           yt + xt =                       2
                                                        dr =              eu W̃u du ,
                        0 (yr − xr ) 1 − W̃s(r)                       −∞


where the second equality follows by a change of variable. Now Ŷt = ws(t) =
Wt follows from the definition of Wt∗ . The proof of the lemma is therefore
complete.
   We now discuss the behavior of solutions of (4.7) in the chordal coordinate
system, but generalize to the case κ 6= 4.

Lemma 4.13. Let ã, b̃ > 0, let Y : (−∞, ∞) → [−1, 1] be a solution of
                                             p
      dYs = (−ã (Ys − 1) − b̃ (Ys + 1)) ds + κ (1 − Ys2 )/2 dBs ,

and let Ŷt be the corresponding process,
                                         as described following (4.34). Then
on any time interval which avoids t : Ys∗ (t) ∈
                                              / {±1} , the process Ŷt satisfies
the SDE of the driving term for SLE(κ; 2 (ã − 1), 2 (b̃ − 1)):

                              2 (ã − 1)         2 (b̃ − 1)       √
                     dŶt =                 +                 +       κ dB̂t
                               Ŷt − xt          Ŷt − yt

for some Brownian motion B̂t , where xt and yt satisfy (1.4) with Ŷt in place
of Wt .
                 Rs
Proof. Let βs = −∞ eu Yu du, ys∗ := (βs + es )/2 and x∗s := (βs − es )/2. Itô’s
formula and the definition of t∗ give

                es p                           es
  dws = es Ys ds +      κ (1 − Ys2 )/2 dBs + (−ã (Ys − 1) − b̃ (Ys + 1)) ds
                 2                              2
              p                         ã − 1     b̃ − 1  ∗ ′
             = κ t∗ ′ (s) dBs + 4 e−s             +         t (s) ds
                                        Ys + 1 Ys − 1
                          p                    ã − 1       b̃ − 1  ∗′
                       = κ t∗ ′ (s) dBs + 2               +          t (s) ds .
                                                 ws − x∗s ws − ys∗

Now set                               Z s∗ (t) p
                              B̂t =                t∗ ′ (u) dBu .
                                       −∞


                                            117
                                                                R s∗ (t)
Then B̂t is clearly a continuous martingale. Since also hB̂it = −∞ t∗ ′ (u) du =
t, we find that B̂ is a Brownian motion with respect to t. The above formula
for dw gives
                          √           ã − 1     b̃ − 1 
                   dŶt = κ dB̂t + 2           +           dt ,
                                       Ŷt − xt Ŷt − yt
where xt := x∗s∗ (t) and yt := ys∗∗ (t) . Now

                                         ∂s x∗s      2
                              ∂t xt =     ′     =          ,
                                        t∗ (s)    xt − Ŷt
and similarly for yt . This concludes the proof.
   As mentioned at the beginning of this section (§4), existence and unique-
ness of solutions to the usual SDE defining SLE(κ; ρ1 , ρ2 ) have not been
proved beyond times when the driving term Wt meets the force points. We
now offer the following.
Definition 4.14. If ã, b̃ > 0, then the Loewner equation driven by the pro-
cess Ŷ of Lemma 4.13 is called SLE(κ; 2 (ã − 1), 2 (b̃ − 1)) (starting from
(0, 0− , 0+ )).

4.6     Loewner driving term convergence
In this section, we complete the proof of Theorem 1.3. The theorem will
follow quite easily from Theorem 4.1.
Proof of Theorem 1.3. Fix T, ǫ, ǫ0 , ǫ′ > 0. Let Ys and W̃s be coupled as
in Theorem 4.1, but with ǫ′ in place of ǫ. Let Ŷt , t∗ (s) and s∗ (t) be defined
from Ys as in the beginning of §4.5. Since the interior of the set of times for
which Ys ∈ {−1, 1} is empty, it follows that there is some positive t0 > 0
such that with probability at least 1 − ǫ0 we have t∗ (1) − t∗ (0) > t0 . Because
Ys is stationary, it follows that

                      P t∗ (s + 1) − t∗ (s) > e2s t0 ≥ 1 − ǫ0 .
                                                   


In particular, there is some S0 > 0 such that P t∗ (S0 ) > T + 1 ≥ 1 − ǫ0 .
                                                                     

Fix an S0 satisfying this and additionally e−S0 < ǫ0 /2.
    Let
                                   1 s 2u
                                    Z
                          t̃(s) :=        e (1 − W̃u2 ) du ,
                                   8 −∞

                                           118
which is the equivalent of t∗ (s) with W̃ replacing Y . It is clear that if
ǫ′ = ǫ′ (S0 , ǫ0 ) is sufficiently small and

                           sup |W̃s − Ys | : s ∈ [−S0 , S0 ] < ǫ′ ,
                               
                                                                     (4.35)

then for every s ∈ [−∞, S0 ] the right hand side in (4.34) differs from the
corresponding quantity where W̃ replaces Y by at most ǫ0 . Lemma 4.12
then gives           
                  sup |Ŵt̃(s) − Wt∗ (s) | : s ≤ [0, S0 ] < ǫ0 ,
where Wt is the chordal driving term for SLE(4; a/λ − 1, b/λ − 1) and Ŵ
is the chordal driving term for φD ◦ γ. (Here, we also use the fact that
s∗ (t∗ (s)) = s.) If we assume (4.35) with ǫ′ sufficiently small, we also get
sup |t∗ (s) − t̃(s)| : s ≤ S0 < ǫ0 . Let T0 be the obvious upper bound for t̃
and t∗ in (−∞, S0 ]; that is, T0 := e2S0 /16. Also set
                        
           M(ǫ0 ) := sup |Wt0 − Wt1 | : 0 ≤ t0 ≤ t1 ≤ t0 + ǫ0 ≤ T0 + ǫ0 .

Since Wt is a.s. continuous, M(ǫ0 ) → 0 in probability as ǫ0 → 0. Now the
triangle inequality |Ŵt̃(s) − Wt̃(s) | ≤ |Ŵt̃(s) − Wt∗ (s) | + |Wt∗ (s) − Wt̃(s) | shows
                                         
that when (4.35) holds we have sup |Ŵt̃(s) − Wt̃(s) | : s ≤ S0 < ǫ0 + M(ǫ0 ).
              
Hence, sup |Ŵt − Wt | : t ∈ [0, t̃(S0 )] < ǫ0 + M(ǫ0 ). But we have seen that
t∗ (S0 ) is very likely to be larger than T + 1 and that |t∗ (S0 ) − t̃(S0 )| < ǫ0
when (4.35) holds. By Theorem 4.1, when rD is large (4.35) holds with high
probability. This concludes the proof.


4.7     Carathéodory convergence
For K ⊂ H let Nǫ (K) denote the ǫ-neighborhood of K in H, and let Hǫ (K)
denote the unbounded connected component of H r Nǫ (K). Set

         dCKC (K, K ′ ) := inf{ǫ > 0 : K ∩ Hǫ (K ′ ) = ∅ = K ′ ∩ Hǫ (K)} .

It is easy to see that dCKC is a metric on the collection of compact con-
nected K ⊂ H such that H r K is connected. This metric is related to the
Carathéodory Kernel convergence topology, which is of central importance
in the theory of conformal mappings.
    Let Kt and Kt′ denote the evolving hulls corresponding to two Loewner
evolutions generated by continuous driving terms Wt and Wt′ , respectively

                                          119
(as defined in §1.4). Such evolving hulls are also sometimes called Loewner
chains. We set for T ≥ 0,

                       dTCKC (K, K ′ ) := sup dCKC (Kt , Kt′ ) .
                                          t∈[0,T ]


Following is a simple lemma relating uniform convergence of driving terms
to dCKC -convergence of the corresponding Loewner chains.

Lemma 4.15. The Loewner transform W 7→ K is a continuous map from
the space of continuous paths W with the topology of uniform convergence to
the space of Loewner chains with dTCKC -convergence.
    In other words, for every ǫ > 0, T > 0 and W : [0, T ] → R continuous,
there is some δ = δ(ǫ, T, W ) > 0 such that if W̃ : [0, T ] → R is continuous
and satisfies supt∈[0,T ] |Wt − W̃t | < δ, then the corresponding Loewner chains
satisfy dTCKC (K, K̃) < ǫ.

   This lemma is similar in spirit to [Law05, Proposition 4.47]. As is well
known, K̃T → KT in the Hausdorff metric does not follow from W̃ → W
uniformly in [0, T ].
Proof. Fix T > 0. Suppose that W n → W uniformly in [0, T ]. Let K n
                                                                  (n)
denote the Loewner chain corresponding to W n and let gt : H r Ktn → H
denote the corresponding Loewner evolution. Fix some t0 ∈ [0, T ]. Since
diam(Ktn0 ) is clearly bounded by a function of T and kW n k∞ [Law05, Lemma
4.13], the closure of {Ktn0 : n ∈ N+ } is compact with respect to the Hausdorff
metric on nonempty compact subsets of H. Consider some integer sequence
                                                                    n
nj → ∞ for which the Hausdorff limit K ′ := limj→∞ Kt0j exists. If z ∈
H r Kt0 , then there is a neighborhood U of z in H such that U ∩ Ktn0 = ∅ for
all sufficiently large n, by the continuity of solutions of ODE’s in the vector
field specifying the ODE. It follows that z ∈     / K ′ , and hence K ′ ⊂ Kt0 .
      With the intention of reaching a contradiction, suppose that there is some
point z ∈ (∂Kt0 ) r (K ′ ∪ R). Let z ′ be a point in H r Kt0 satisfying |z −
                                                                           (n )
z ′ | < dist(z ′ , K ′ ∪ R)/3. The above argument shows that limj→∞ gt0 j (z ′ ) =
                                                                                    n
gt0 (z ′ ) ∈ H. On the other hand, for all sufficiently large j we have dist(z ′ , Kt0j ) >
2 |z − z ′ |. Now the Koebe distortion theorem (e.g. [Pom92, Cor. 1.4]) applied
                            (n )
to the restriction of gt0 j to the disk of radius 2 |z − z ′ | about z ′ (once with
                                           (n )                    (n )
z ′ and again with z) shows that Im gt0 j (z) ≥ (3/16) Im gt0 j (z ′ ). However,
since z ∈ Kt0 , for every ǫ > 0 there is some first t1 ∈ [0, t0 ) such that

                                          120
Im gt1 (z) ≤ ǫ. The convergence argument above shows that for all arbitrarily
              (n)                       (n)
large n Im gt1 (z) ≤ 2 ǫ. Since Im gt (z) decreases monotonically in t, it
                  (n)
follows that Im gt0 (z) ≤ 2 ǫ for all sufficiently large n. This contradicts our
                          (n )                   (n )
previous conclusion Im gt0 j (z) ≥ (3/16) Im gt0 j (z ′ ) → (3/16) Im gt0 (z ′ ) > 0,
and proves K ′ ⊃ (∂Kt0 ) r R.
    Let K̃ be the union of K ′ and the bounded connected components of
H r K ′ . The above implies K̃ ⊃ Kt0 r R. Now note that Kt0 r R is dense in
Kt0 . (This follows from the easy direction 2 ⇒ 1 in [LSW01, Theorem 2.6]
and from the fact that H ∩ Kt r Kt′ is nonempty when t > t′ .) Consequently,
K̃ = Kt0 , which implies that dCKC (Ktn , Kt ) → 0 for every fixed t ∈ [0, T ].
    Observe that the above proof also gives lims→t dCKC (Ks , Kt ) = 0 for t ∈
[0, T ] and s tending to t in [0, T ]. Thus, Kt is continuous in t with respect
to dCKC . Since dCKC (L, L̃) ≤ dCKC (L′ , L̃) ∨ dCKC (L′′ , L̃) when L′ ⊂ L ⊂ L′′ ,
the dTCKC convergence easily follows from the pointwise convergence, from
continuity of Kt and from monotonicity of Ktn in t.


4.8     Improving the convergence topology
In this subsection we complete the proof of Theorem 1.2. There are ex-
amples showing that the convergence of the Loewner driving term does
not imply the uniform convergence of the paths parameterized by capacity.
(See [LSW04, §3.4].) Therefore, we will need to apply other considerations.
Before embarking on the proof we note that when a, b ≥ λ the trace of
SLE(4; a/λ − 1, b/λ − 1) is a simple path that does not hit R, except at its
starting point. Indeed, note first that the force points are moving mono-
tonically away from one another. By comparison with a Bessel process, for
example, it is easy to see that the trace does not hit the real line at any
time t > 0. It also does not hit itself, since t 7→ gs (γ(t + s)) has law that is
mutually absolutely continuous with the path of SLE(4).

Lemma 4.16. Let T > 0 and let Wn : [0, T ] → R be a sequence of continuous
functions converging uniformly to a function W : [0, T ] → R. Suppose that
each Wn is the driving term of a Loewner evolution of a path γn : [0, T ] → H
and W is the driving term of a Loewner evolution of a simple path γ : [0, T ] →
H satisfying γ(0, T ] ∩ R = ∅. Then limn→∞ supt∈[0,T ] dH (γn [0, t], γ[0, t]) = 0,
where dH denotes the the Hausdorff metric.



                                        121
Proof. First note that diam γn [0, T ] is bounded, because kWn k∞ is bounded.
Fix some t ∈ [0, T ], and let Γ denote a subsequential Hausdorff limit of
γn [0, t]. It suffices to prove that Γ = γ[0, t]. By Lemma 4.15, we know that
for every ǫ > 0 we have Γ ∩Hǫ (γ[0,   S t]) = ∅. Since γ is a simple path satisfying
γ(0, T ] ∩ R = ∅, it follows that ǫ>0 Hǫ (γ[0, t]) = H r γ[0, t], which implies
that Γ ⊂ R∪γ[0, t]. Fix some z1 ∈ Rrγ[0, t] = Rr{γ(0)}. By the continuity
in W and z of the solutions of Loewner’s equation (1.3), it follows that there
is a neighborhood V of z1 such that V ∩ γn [0, T ] = ∅ for all sufficiently large
n. This implies z1 ∈   / Γ, and hence Γ ⊂ γ[0, t].
     Now let t′ ∈ [0, t]. By Lemma 4.15 again, for every ǫ > 0 and every n
sufficiently large γ(t′ ) ∈
                          / Hǫ (γn [0, t]), which means that every path connecting
    ′
γ(t ) to ∞ in H must come within distance ǫ from γn [0, t]. Thus, every such
path must intersect Γ. Since Γ ⊂ γ[0, t] is closed, this implies γ(t′ ) ∈ Γ.
Therefore, Γ = γ[0, t]; that is, limn→∞ dH (γn [0, t], γ[0, t]) = 0. Since γn [0, t]
and γ[0, t] are monotone increasing in t and γ[0, t] is continuous in t with
respect to dH , it easily follows that limn→∞ supt∈[0,T ] dH (γn [0, t], γ[0, t]) =
0.
    Here is an outline of the main ideas going into the proof of Theorem 1.2.
Let γ φ be the path φ ◦ γ parametrized by half-plane capacity. The main
step in the proof is to show that if we fix T > 0 we have supt∈[0,T ] |γ φ (t) −
γSLE (t)| → 0 in probability. By Theorem 1.3 and Lemma 4.16, we get
supt∈[0,T ] dH (γ φ [0, t], γSLE [0, t]) → 0 in probability (since γSLE is a simple
path). We only need to rule out the possibility that γ φ has significant (and
fast) backtracking along γSLE . This is ruled out by invoking Lemma 3.17 and
observing that the φ-image of the place where simple random walk (starting
from a vertex near φ−1 (i)) hits ∂D(γ) can be close to any fixed segment of
γSLE (0, T ].
Proof of Theorem 1.2. Let γ φ be the path φ ◦ γ parametrized by half-
plane capacity. Let δ, T > 0 and rD = radφ−1 (i) (D). Let W denote the
Loewner driving term of γSLE . Since γSLE is a.s. a simple path, Lemma 4.16
implies that for every ǫ > 0 there is some ǫ′ = ǫ′ (ǫ, γSLE ) > 0 such that if
W̃ is the driving term of a continuous path γ̃ and supt∈[0,T ] |W̃t − Wt | < ǫ′ ,
then supt∈[0,T ] dH (γSLE [0, t], γ̃[0, t]) < ǫ. Moreover, it is not hard to see that
ǫ′ can be chosen as a measurable function of W . Hence, Theorem 1.3 implies
that for every ǫ0 > 0 if rD is larger than some function of ǫ0 , δ, T, a and b,
then there is a coupling of h and SLE(4; a/λ − 1, b/λ − 1) such that ρ :=
supt∈[0,T ] dH γ φ [0, t], γSLE [0, t] < ǫ0 with probability at least 1 − δ. Without

                                        122
yet specifying ǫ0 , we assume that indeed γ φ [0,     T ] and γSLE are so coupled.
Let A0 be the event that ρ < ǫ0 . Then P A0 ≥ 1 − δ.
    Let 0 < t0 < t1 < t2 < t3 ≤ T . We will show that under this coupling, if
rD is large, then with high probability γ φ (t) is close to γSLE [t0 , T ] for every
t ∈ [t3 , T ]. This will then imply that supt∈[0,T ] |γSLE (t) − γ φ (t)| is small.
    Since γSLE is a.s. a simple path disjoint       from {i}, there is a constant
s0 = s0 (t0 , t1 , t2 , t3 , T, δ) > 0 such that P A1 ≥ 1 − δ, where A1 is the event
that
   1. the harmonic measure of γSLE [t1 , t2 ] from i with respect to the domain
      H r γSLE [0, ∞) is at least s0 ,
                            
   2. dist R, γSLE [t0 , T ] > s0 ,
                                          
   3. dist γSLE [0, tj ], γSLE [tj+1 , T ] > s0 for j = 0, 1, 2,

   4. diam γSLE [0, T ] < 1/s0 , and

   5. i ∈ Hs0 (γSLE [0, T ]).
(It is tedious, but straightforward, to check that A1 is measurable.)
     Consider a simple random walk S independent from h starting at a T G-
vertex closest to φ−1 (i). Let τT be the first time t when S(t) ∈ ∂D(φ−1 ◦
γ φ [0, T ]), and as in §3.7, let zT := S(τT ). We claim that for every ǫ1 > 0 if
rD is sufficiently large and ǫ0 is sufficiently small, then
      h                                                 i
                                                 φ
                                  
    P dist φ(zT ), γSLE [t1 , t2 ] < ǫ1 γSLE , γ [0, T ] > s0 /2     on A0 ∩ A1 .
                                                                              (4.36)
     To prove (4.36) first observe that conditional on γSLE such that A1 holds a
two-dimensional Brownian motion Ŝ started at i has probability at least s0 to
first hit γSLE ∪ R in γSLE [t1 , t2 ]. Moreover, if this happens, the Brownian mo-
tion is likely to stay within a compact subset L ⊂ H before hitting γSLE [t1 , t2 ]
and not to come arbitrarily close to γSLE far from its hitting point. On com-
pact subsets of H, the map rD −1 φ−1 distorts distances by a bounded factor,
by the Koebe distortion theorem [Pom92, Thm. 1.3 & Cor. 1.4]. Since φ−1
takes a Brownian motion to a monotonically time-changed Brownian motion,
by taking rD large we may couple (rD )−1 S and (rD )−1 φ−1 ◦ Ŝ to stay arbi-
trarily close (until φ−1 ◦ Ŝ hits ∂D) with high probability, up to a time change.
Assuming that ρ is arbitrarily small and taking 5 into account, we find that
on A1 and given (γSLE , γ φ [0, T ]), with conditional probability at least (5/6) s0

                                        123
                                                                       
the random walk gets to a vertex v where dist φ(v), γSLE [t1 , t2 ] is arbitrarily
small before time τT . Now, on the event A0 , γ φ [0, T ] has to be close by,
and so we find from Lemma 2.1 that on A0 ∩ A1 and given (γSLE , γ φ [0, T ]),
with conditional probability at least (2/3) s0 we have dist φ(zT ), γSLE [t1 , t2 ]
arbitrarily small. This proves (4.36).
     We take γ φ [T, ∞) independent from γSLE given γ φ [0, T ] in the coupling
of γSLE with γ. As in §3.5, let τ be the hitting time of S on ∂D(γ). In (3.62)
we choose ǫ = δ, and get a corresponding p > 0. Let A2 denote the event

                               P zT = Sτ S, γ φ [0, T ] ≥ p .
                                                      

                                                                             
Then (3.62) reads P A2 ≥ 1 − δ. In conjunction with (4.36) and P Aj ≥
1 − δ, j = 0, 1, this implies that
       h h                                                  i         i
    P P dist φ(Sτ ), γSLE [t1 , t2 ] < ǫ1 γSLE , γ φ [0, T ] > p s0 /2 ≥ 1 − 3 δ .
                                      

                                                                              (4.37)
     Conditional on Sτ , on the event A1 ∩ {dist φ(Sτ ), γSLE [t1 , t2 ] < ǫ1 } we
invoke Lemma 3.17 with Sτ translated to 0 where the p in that lemma is
chosen as p s0 δ/2 and the R is taken to be s2 rD , where s2 = s2 (s0 ) > 0 is a
small constant depending only on s0 . Note that the assumption necessary for
the lemma that dist(Sτ , {v0 }∪∂D) > 4 R holds by 2, 4 and 5 in the definition
of A1 and the fact that the distance distortion of rD −1 φ−1 is bounded on
compact subsets of H. Let ã denote the a provided by the lemma, which is
a function of s0 , a, b and δ. Set r = R/(ã + 1). Then the lemma together
with (4.37) imply that with probability 1 − O(δ) there is within distance ǫ1
from γSLE [t1 , t2 ] the φ-image of a vertex v ∈ ∂D(γ) such that φ−1 ◦ γ φ [0, T ]
has precisely two disjoint crossings of the annulus {z : r ≤ |z − v| ≤ R}. If
this happens, let z1 be a point in γSLE [t1 , t2 ] closest   to such a φ(v).
             ′
                                                       
     Let r denote the lower bound we get on |φ(v) − φ(z)| : |v − z| ≥ r
which follows from the bounded distortion of rD φ. We may also assume that
|φ(v) − φ(z)| ≤ s0 /8 when |v − z| ≤ R. Now take ǫ1 = r ′ /4 and let s3 =
s3 (δ, r ′ ) ∈ (0, r ′ /8) be so small that with probability at least 1 − δ for every
ball of radius r ′ /4 centered at a point z0 ∈ γSLE [t0 , T ] the distance outside of
the ball B(z0 , r ′ /4) between the two connected components of R∪γSLE [0, T ]r
{z0 } is at least s3 . Note that when this is the case, every path connecting
these two components outside of B(z0 , r ′/4) has to intersect Hs3 /3 (γSLE [0, T ]).
Consequently, if additionally ρ < s3 /3, then γ φ [0, T ] cannot contain an arc
whose endpoints are within distance s3 /4 of these two components unless

                                        124
the arc visits the ball B(z0 , r ′ /4). If ρ is sufficiently small, then there is
some t′3 ≤ t3 such that γSLE (t3 ) − γ φ (t′3 ) < s3 /4. Now choose z0 := z1 ,
for the previous paragraph. The path γ φ [0, t′3 ] must pass through the ball
B(z0 , r ′/4), and therefore φ−1 ◦ γ φ [0, t′3 ] contains two disjoint crossings of
the annulus {z : r ≤ |z − v| ≤ R}. If we assume that φ−1 ◦ γ φ [0, T ] has
no more than two disjoint crossings of this annulus (which happens with
probability at least 1 − O(δ)), it follows that for t ∈ [t3 , T ] the point γ φ (t) is
closer to γSLE [t0 , T ] than to γSLE [0, t0 ] ∪ R. Since in the above δ, t0 and t3
are arbitrary subject to the constraint 0 < t0 < t3 and δ > 0, the claimed
uniform convergence in [0, T ] follows.
    To prove convergence in law with respect to the uniform d∗ metric, it
suffices to show that for every radius r1 > 0 there is some r2 > r1 such that
γ φ is unlikely to return to B(0, r1 ) after its first exit from B(0, r2 ). For this
proof, we will use the conformal invariance of extremal length (see [Ahl73]).
    Fix some r1 > 0. The extremal length of the collection of arcs in the
half-annulus A := {z ∈ H : r1 < |z| < r2 } which connect R+ with R− tends
to zero as r2 → ∞. Let A′ := φ−1 (A), ∂j := φ−1 {z ∈ H : |z| = rj }), j = 1, 2,
L := dist(∂1 , ∂2 ; A′ ) and L′ := dist(∂+ , ∂− ; A′ ). By conformal invariance of
extremal length, it follows that L′ /L → 0 as r2 → ∞, uniformly in D.
(Otherwise, the metric which is equal to the Euclidean metric in the ball of
radius 3 L centered on a point in an arc of length at most 2 L from ∂1 to ∂2
in A′ and is zero outside this ball contradicts the extremal length going to
zero.)
    Let β ⊂ A′ be an arc of diameter at most 2 L′ connecting ∂+ and ∂− . Let
L1 := dist(β, ∂1 ; A′ ) and L2 := dist(β, ∂2 ; A′ ). Since L′ /L → 0 as r2 → ∞,
we have L1 ≥ L/3 or L2 ≥ L/3 if r2 is sufficiently large large. Suppose
first that L2 ≥ L/3. Let s0 denote the first time such that |φ ◦ γ(s0 )| = r2 .
Then there are two connected components          β1 and β2 of β r γ[0, s0 ] such that
                                  −1
γ[0, s0 ] ∪ β1 ∪ β2 separates φ B(0, r1 ) from y∂ in D. Now the proof of
Theorem 3.22 shows that
                                                     
                             P γ ∩ β1 6= ∅ γ[0, s0 ] < δ

if L2 /L′ is sufficiently large. (Hence when L2 ≥ L/3 and r2 is sufficiently
large.) A similar estimate holds with β2 . Thus, with probability at most
O(δ), γ φ contains two disjoint crossings of the annulus r1 ≤ |z| ≤ r2 . On
the other hand, if L2 < L/3 and L1 ≥ L/3, then we may apply the same
argument to the reversal of γ (or else slightly modify the way the analog of

                                         125
Theorem 3.22 is proved) to reach the same conclusion. This completes the
proof.


5    Other lattices
In this section we describe the modifications necessary to adapt the proof of
Theorems 1.3 and 1.2 to the more general framework of Theorem 1.4.
     Before we go into the actual proof, a few words need to be said about
the properties of the weighted random walk on G and its convergence to
Brownian motion. Fix some vertex v0 in G, and let V0 denote its orbit under
the group generated by the two translations T1 and T2 preserving G. If
the walk starts at v0 , then a new Markov chain is obtained by looking at
the sequence of vertices in V0 which the walk visits. A simple path reversal
argument shows that for this new Markov chain the transition probability
from v to u is the same as the transition probability from u to v, for every
pair of vertices v, u ∈ V0 . Also observe that the R2 -length of a single step
has an exponential tail. This is enough to show that the Markov chain on
V0 , rescaled appropriately in time and space, converges to a linear image of
Brownian motion (and it is not hard to verify that the linear transformation
is non-singular). Moreover, the few properties of the simple random walk on
T G which we have used in the course of the paper are easily verified for this
Markov chain on V0 and easily translated to the weighted walk on G.
Proof of Theorem 1.4. Very few changes are needed to adapt the proof.
Let G denote the original lattice consisting of only edges of positive weight,
and let Ḡ denote the triangulation of G, as described in §1.5. Let Ḡ∗ denote
the planar dual of Ḡ.
   The statement and proof of Lemma 3.1 requires some changes, because in
the more general setup it is not true that every vertex adjacent to an interface
on the right has a G-neighbor on the left of the interface (and similarly in the
other direction). Thus, in the revised version of the lemma, the assumption
that each vertex in V+ neighbors with a vertex in V− ∪ V∂ and every vertex in
V− neighbors with a vertex in V+ ∪V∂ needs to be replaced by the assumption
that for some constant m, depending on the lattice, for every vertex v ∈ V+
the G-graph-distance from v to V− ∪ V∂ is at most m, and symmetrically for
vertices in V− . This change requires   a few
                                           extra lines in the proof of (3.1).
Let Mj be the maximum of E eh(v) K for vertices in V+ at G-distance at
                                



                                      126
most j from V− ∪ V∂ . Every vertex at G-distance j > 0 from V− ∪ V∂ has a
G-neighbor at G-distance j − 1 from V− ∪ V∂ . Therefore, the proof of (3.8)
now gives
                                    c   1−c
                      Mj ≤ O(1) Mm    Mj−1  + O(1) ,
where c < 1 is some constant depending only on the lattice and its edge
weights. We can certainly drop the trailing additive O(1). Induction on j
now gives
                                                  (1−c)j
                        Mj ≤ O(1)qj Mm     c qj
                                                M0       ,
                                         j−1
                                              = 1 − (1 − c)j /c. When j = m
                                                            
where qj = 1 + (1 − c) + · · · + (1 − c)
this reads
                           (1−c)m                (1−c)m
                        Mm         ≤ O(1)qm M0           ,
Clearly, M0 ≤ eΛ̄ , and the bound      Mm =Om,Λ̄ (1) follows. A corresponding
                                   −h(v)
bound clearly also holds for E e           K when v ∈ V− . The remainder of
the proof of the analog of Lemma 3.1 proceeds without difficulty.
    The proof of Lemma 3.2 needs to be similarly adapted, but essentially
the same argument works.
    The next point which requires adaptation is the definition of Z0σ in §3.5.
Let Σ denote the set of pairs (v, e∗ ), where v is a vertex in G and e∗ is an edge
in Ḡ∗ that is dual to one of the edges incident with v in Ḡ. If σ = (v, e∗ ) ∈ Σ,
let Z σ denote the event that the first vertex adjacent to γ that S hits is v
and moreover e∗ ∈ γ. Let Σ′ be a collection of elements of Σ, one from each
orbit underSthe group generated by the translations T1 and T2 preserving G.
Let Z0 := σ∈Σ′ Z σ . The proof then proceeds essentially unchanged, with
Z σ in place of Z0σ and with the modified definition for Z0 .


References
[Ahl73] Lars V. Ahlfors. Conformal invariants: topics in geometric function
        theory. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1973. McGraw-Hill
        Series in Higher Mathematics.
[Bef02] Vincent Beffara.  The dimension of the SLE curves, 2002,
        arXiv:math.PR/0211322. To appear in Ann. Probab.
[BEMF86] J. Bricmont, A. El Mellouki, and J. Fröhlich. Random surfaces in
       statistical mechanics: roughening, rounding, wetting,. . . . J. Statist.
       Phys., 42(5-6):743–798, 1986.

                                       127
[BPZ84] A. A. Belavin, A. M. Polyakov, and A. B. Zamolodchikov. Infi-
        nite conformal symmetry in two-dimensional quantum field theory.
        Nuclear Phys. B, 241(2):333–380, 1984.
[Car05] John Cardy. SLE for theoretical physicists.            Ann. Physics,
        318(1):81–118, 2005, cond-mat/0503313.
[CN06] Federico Camia and Charles M. Newman. Two-dimensional critical
       percolation: the full scaling limit. Comm. Math. Phys., 268(1):1–38,
       2006. arXiv:math.PR/0605035.
[Con89] A. Coniglio. Fractal structure of Ising and Potts clusters: Exact
        results. Physical Review Letters, 62:3054–3057, June 1989.
[DFMS97] Philippe Di Francesco, Pierre Mathieu, and David Sénéchal. Con-
       formal field theory. Graduate Texts in Contemporary Physics.
       Springer-Verlag, New York, 1997.
[dN83]    Marcel den Nijs. Extended scaling relations for the magnetic critical
          exponents of the Potts model. Phys. Rev. B (3), 27(3):1674–1679,
          1983.
[DS84]    Peter G. Doyle and J. Laurie Snell. Random walks and elec-
          tric networks, volume 22 of Carus Mathematical Monographs.
          Mathematical Association of America, Washington, DC, 1984,
          arXiv:math.PR/0001057.
[DS87]    B. Duplantier and H. Saleur. Exact critical properties of two-
          dimensional dense self-avoiding walks. Nuclear Physics B, 290:291–
          326, 1987.
[DS88]    B. Duplantier and H. Saleur. Winding-angle distributions of two-
          dimensional self-avoiding walks from conformal invariance. Physical
          Review Letters, 60:2343–2346, June 1988.
[Dup89] B. Duplantier. Two-dimensional fractal geometry, critical phenom-
        ena and conformal invariance. Physics Reports, 184:229–257, De-
        cember 1989.
[Fol01]   G. Foltin. An alternative field theory for the Kosterlitz-Thouless
          transition. Journal of Physics A Mathematical General, 34:5327–
          5333, July 2001.

                                     128
[FS81]    Jürg Fröhlich and Thomas Spencer. The Kosterlitz-Thouless transi-
          tion in two-dimensional abelian spin systems and the Coulomb gas.
          Comm. Math. Phys., 81(4):527–602, 1981.

[Gaw99] Krzysztof Gawȩdzki. Lectures on conformal field theory. In Quan-
        tum fields and strings: a course for mathematicians, Vol. 1, 2
        (Princeton, NJ, 1996/1997), pages 727–805. Amer. Math. Soc.,
        Providence, RI, 1999.

[Gia02] Giambattista Giacomin. Limit theorems for random interface mod-
        els of Ginzburg-Landau ∇φ type. In Stochastic partial differential
        equations and applications (Trento, 2002), volume 227 of Lecture
        Notes in Pure and Appl. Math., pages 235–253. Dekker, New York,
        2002.

[GJ87]    James Glimm and Arthur Jaffe. Quantum physics. Springer-Verlag,
          New York, second edition, 1987. A functional integral point of view.

[HK01] G. Huber and J. Kondev. Passive-scalar turbulence and the geom-
       etry of loops. APS Meeting Abstracts, pages 2008–+, June 2001.

[Isi92]   M. B. Isichenko. Percolation, statistical topography, and transport
          in random media. Reviews of Modern Physics, 64:961–1043, Octo-
          ber 1992.

[Kad78] L. P. Kadanoff. Lattice Coulomb gas representations of two-
        dimensional problems. Journal of Physics A Mathematical General,
        11:1399–1417, July 1978.

[KDH02] J. Kondev, S. Du, and G. Huber. Two-dimensional passive-scalar
       turbulence and the geometry of loops. APS Meeting Abstracts,
       pages 4003–+, March 2002.

[Ken01] Richard Kenyon. Dominos and the Gaussian free field.             Ann.
        Probab., 29(3):1128–1137, 2001.

[KH95] J. Kondev and C. L. Henley. Geometrical Exponents of Contour
       Loops on Random Gaussian Surfaces. Physical Review Letters,
       74:4580–4583, June 1995.



                                     129
[KHS00] J. Kondev, C. L. Henley, and D. G. Salinas. Nonlinear measures
        for characterizing rough surface morphologies. Physical Review E,
        61:104–125, January 2000.
[KN04] Wouter Kager and Bernard Nienhuis. A guide to stochastic Löwner
       evolution and its applications. J. Statist. Phys., 115(5-6):1149–1229,
       2004, math-ph/0312056.
[Kos77] J. M. Kosterlitz. The d-dimensional Coulomb gas and the roughen-
        ing transition . Journal of Physics C Solid State Physics, 10:3753–
        3760, October 1977.
[KS88]   Ioannis Karatzas and Steven E. Shreve. Brownian motion and
         stochastic calculus. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1988.
[KT73] J. M. Kosterlitz and D. J. Thouless. Ordering, metastability and
       phase transitions in two-dimensional systems . Journal of Physics
       C Solid State Physics, 6:1181–1203, April 1973.
[Law91] Gregory F. Lawler. Intersections of random walks. Birkhäuser
        Boston Inc., Boston, MA, 1991.
[Law98] Gregory F. Lawler. Strict concavity of the intersection exponent
        for Brownian motion in two and three dimensions. Math. Phys.
        Electron. J., 4:Paper 5, 67 pp. (electronic), 1998.
[Law04] Gregory F. Lawler. An introduction to the stochastic Loewner evo-
        lution. In Random walks and geometry, pages 261–293. Walter de
        Gruyter GmbH & Co. KG, Berlin, 2004.
[Law05] Gregory F. Lawler. Conformally invariant processes in the plane,
        volume 114 of Mathematical Surveys and Monographs. American
        Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2005.
[LSW01] Gregory F. Lawler, Oded Schramm, and Wendelin Werner. Values
        of Brownian intersection exponents. I. Half-plane exponents. Acta
        Math., 187(2):237–273, 2001, arXiv:math.PR/9911084.
[LSW02] Gregory F. Lawler, Oded Schramm, and Wendelin Werner. Val-
        ues of Brownian intersection exponents. III. Two-sided exponents.
        Ann. Inst. H. Poincaré Probab. Statist., 38(1):109–123, 2002,
        arXiv:math.PR/0005294.

                                    130
[LSW03] Gregory Lawler, Oded Schramm, and Wendelin Werner. Conformal
        restriction: the chordal case. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 16(4):917–955
        (electronic), 2003, arXiv:math.PR/0209343.
[LSW04] Gregory F. Lawler, Oded Schramm, and Wendelin Werner.
        Conformal invariance of planar loop-erased random walks and
        uniform spanning trees. Ann. Probab., 32(1B):939–995, 2004,
        arXiv:math.PR/0112234.
[Man67] B. Mandelbrot. How Long Is the Coast of Britain? Statistical Self-
        Similarity and Fractional Dimension. Science, 156:636–638, May
        1967.
[Nie82] B. Nienhuis. Exact Critical Point and Critical Exponents of O(n)
        Models in Two Dimensions. Physical Review Letters, 49:1062–1065,
        October 1982.
[Nie84] Bernard Nienhuis. Critical behavior of two-dimensional spin models
        and charge asymmetry in the Coulomb gas. J. Statist. Phys., 34(5-
        6):731–761, 1984.
[NS97]   Ali Naddaf and Thomas Spencer. On homogenization and scaling
         limit of some gradient perturbations of a massless free field. Comm.
         Math. Phys., 183(1):55–84, 1997.
[Pom92] Ch. Pommerenke.        Boundary behaviour of conformal maps.
        Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1992.
[RS05]   Steffen Rohde and Oded Schramm. Basic properties of SLE. Ann.
         of Math. (2), 161(2):883–924, 2005.
[RY99]   Daniel Revuz and Marc Yor. Continuous martingales and Brown-
         ian motion, volume 293 of Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wis-
         senschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences].
         Springer-Verlag, Berlin, third edition, 1999.
[Sch00] Oded Schramm. Scaling limits of loop-erased random walks and
        uniform spanning trees. Israel J. Math., 118:221–288, 2000.
[SD87]   H. Saleur and B. Duplantier. Exact determination of the percolation
         hull exponent in two dimensions. Physical Review Letters, 58:2325–
         2328, June 1987.

                                    131
[She07] Scott Sheffield. Gaussian free fields for mathematicians. Probab.
        Theory Related Fields, 139(3-4):521–541, 2007.

[Smi01] Stanislav Smirnov. Critical percolation in the plane: conformal
        invariance, Cardy’s formula, scaling limits. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris
        Sér. I Math., 333(3):239–244, 2001.

[Spe97] Thomas Spencer. Scaling, the free field and statistical mechanics.
        In The Legacy of Norbert Wiener: A Centennial Symposium (Cam-
        bridge, MA, 1994), volume 60 of Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., pages
        373–389. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1997.

[SS05]   Oded Schramm and Scott Sheffield. Harmonic explorer and
         its convergence to SLE4 . Ann. Probab., 33(6):2127–2148, 2005,
         arXiv:math.PR/0310210.

[Wer04] Wendelin Werner. Random planar curves and Schramm-Loewner
        evolutions. In Lectures on probability theory and statistics, volume
        1840 of Lecture Notes in Math., pages 107–195. Springer, Berlin,
        2004, arXiv:math.PR/0303354.




                                    132
