        Max-Plan k-Institut
         für Mathematik
   in den Naturwissenschaften
              Leipzig




    The Metric Geometry of the Manifold of
  Riemannian Metrics over a Closed Manifold



                       by

                   Brian Clarke

Preprint no.: 21                              2009
      THE METRIC GEOMETRY OF THE MANIFOLD OF RIEMANNIAN
                METRICS OVER A CLOSED MANIFOLD

                                               BRIAN CLARKE


        Abstract. We prove that the L2 Riemannian metric on the manifold of all smooth Riemannian
        metrics on a fixed closed, finite-dimensional manifold induces a metric space structure. As the L2
        metric is a weak Riemannian metric, this fact does not follow from general results. In addition,
        we prove several results on the exponential mapping and distance function of a weak Riemannian
        metric on a Hilbert/Fréchet manifold. The statements are analogous to, but weaker than, what is
        known in the case of a Riemannian metric on a finite-dimensional manifold or a strong Riemannian
        metric on a Hilbert manifold.




                                              1. Introduction
  This paper is the first in a pair studying the metric geometry of the Fréchet manifold M of all C ∞
Riemannian metrics on a fixed closed, finite-dimensional, orientable manifold M . This manifold
has a natural weak Riemannian metric called the L2 metric, which will be defined in Section 2.
The main result of the paper is the following.
Theorem. (M, d), where d is the distance function induced from the L2 metric, is a metric space.
   This is indeed a nontrivial theorem, as the fact that the L2 metric is a weak (as opposed to strong)
Riemannian metric implies that its induced distance function is a priori only a pseudometric. That
is, some points may have distance zero from one another. The first authors we know to have
recognized this are Michor and Mumford. In [14, 15], they found examples of weak Riemannian
metrics on Fréchet manifolds of embeddings for which the distance between any two points is
zero. They then constructed other weak Riemannian metrics that they proved induce metric space
structures on the manifolds (i.e., have positive-definite distance functions).
   The manifold of metrics and the L2 metric have been of interest to mathematicians and physicists
for some time. We first became interested in their study because of their applications to Teichmüller
theory, developed by Fischer and Tromba [21]. If the base manifold M is a Riemann surface of genus
greater than one, then the Teichmüller space of M is diffeomorphic to M−1 /D0 , where M−1 ⊂ M
is the submanifold of hyperbolic metrics (with constant scalar curvature −1) and D0 is the group
of diffeomorphisms that are homotopic to the identity, acting by pull-back. The L2 metric on M
descends to M−1 /D0 and is isometric (up to a constant scalar factor) to the much-studied Weil-
Petersson metric on Teichmüller space. The sequel [2] to this paper contains an application to the
geometry of Teichmüller space with respect to a class of metrics we define on it that generalize the
Weil-Petersson metric.
   The first investigations of the geometry of the manifold of metrics, which essentially avoided
the infinite-dimensional issues that arise, were undertaken by DeWitt as part of his Hamiltonian
formulation of general relativity [5]. Soon thereafter, Ebin [6] used the L2 metric to investigate the
differential topology of M, as well as its quotient by the diffeomorphism group.
   Two decades later, the basic Riemannian geometry of the L2 metric was independently inves-
tigated by Freed and Groisser [8] as well as Gil-Medrano and Michor [9]. (The latter paper even
   Date: April 6, 2009.
   This research was supported by the International Max Planck Research School Mathematics in the Sciences and
the DFG Research Training Group Analysis, Geometry and their Interaction with the Natural Sciences.
                                                        1
2                                           BRIAN CLARKE


considers such questions for open base manifolds M .) Many of the results of the two papers coincide
(both compute the geodesics and curvature of the L2 metric, for instance), and the crucial observa-
tion of both papers is that the computation of certain essential geometric quantities is pointwise in
nature. To illustrate what this means, consider a geodesic on M. This is a one-parameter family
gt of metrics on M , uniquely determined by an initial point g0 and initial tangent vector g00 . That
the geodesic equation is pointwise means that for each x ∈ M , the value of gt (x) depends only on
g0 (x) and g00 (x), and not on the values of g0 or g00 at any other points of M .
   As will be seen in the subsequent sections, the main challenge in studying the metric geometry
of the L2 metric is in moving from pointwise questions to local or even global questions.
   The paper is organized as follows:
   In Section 2, we present the necessary facts and notation needed for studying the manifold of
Riemannian metrics. We also introduce two related Fréchet manifolds, the manifold of smooth
volume forms and the manifold of Riemannian metrics inducing a given volume form, that are of
independent interest and play a role in the study of M. We also give the geodesic equations of M
and the two other manifolds just mentioned.
   In Section 3, we review the definition of a Riemannian metric on a Hilbert or Fréchet manifold,
paying special attention to the distinction between weak and strong metrics. We go into more
detail here than most papers on the subject, since our goal is to bring the differences between the
metric (space) properties of the two kinds of Riemannian metrics into sharp focus. Following the
definitions, we prove some results on the exponential mapping and the induced distance function
of a weak Riemannian manifold, pointing out where these results are weaker than in the case of a
strong Riemannian metric. While the approach is analogous to the strong case, we could not find
a rigorous treatment in the weak case and so included them here.
   In Section 4, we prove the main theorem mentioned above. The results of Section 3 turn out to
be inadequate in this situation, but we give a direct proof for the L2 metric.

Acknowledgements. The results of this paper formed a portion of my Ph.D. thesis ([3], where
the reader may find the facts here presented in significantly greater detail), written at the Max
Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences in Leipzig and submitted to the University of
Leipzig. I would like to thank my advisor Jürgen Jost for his many years of patient assistance. I
am also grateful to Guy Buss, Christoph Sachse, and Nadine Große for many fruitful discussions
and their careful proofreading.

                           2. The Manifold of Riemannian Metrics
2.1. The L2 Metric. For the entirety of the paper, let M denote a fixed closed, orientable, n-
dimensional C ∞ manifold.
   The basic facts about the manifold of Riemannian metrics given in this section can be found in
[3, §2.5]
   We denote by S 2 T ∗ M the vector bundle of symmetric (0, 2) tensors over M , and by S the Fréchet
space of C ∞ sections of S 2 T ∗ M . The space M of Riemannian metrics on M is an open subset of S,
and hence it is trivially a Fréchet manifold, with tangent space at each point canonically identified
with S. (For a detailed treatment of Fréchet manifolds, see, for example, [10]. For a more thorough
treatment of the differential topology and geometry of M, see [6].)
   M carries a natural Riemannian metric (·, ·), called the L2 metric, induced by integration from
the natural scalar product on S 2 T ∗ M . Given any g ∈ M and h, k ∈ S ∼  = Tg M, we define
                                                   Z
                                        (h, k)g :=   trg (hk) dµg .
                                                   M

Here, trg (hk) is given in local coordinates by tr(g −1 hg −1 k) = g ij hil g lm kjm , and µg denotes the
volume form induced by g.
                THE METRIC GEOMETRY OF THE MANIFOLD OF RIEMANNIAN METRICS                                3


   Throughout the paper, we use the notation d for the distance function induced from (·, ·) by
taking the infimum of the lengths of paths between two given points.
   The basic Riemannian geometry of (M, (·, ·)) is relatively well understood. For example, it is
known that the sectional curvature of M is nonpositive (cf. [8, Cor. 1.17]), and the geodesics of
M are known explicitly (cf. Section 2.3).
   We can and will consider related structures restricted to a point x ∈ M . Let Sx := S 2 Tx∗ M
denote the vector space of symmetric (0, 2)-tensors at x, and let Mx ⊂ Sx denote the open subset
of tensors inducing a positive definite scalar product on Tx M . Then Mx is an open submanifold
of Sx , and its tangent space at each point is canonically identified with Sx . For each g ∈ Mx , we
define a scalar product h·, ·ig on Tg Mx ∼
                                         = Sx by setting, for all h, k ∈ Sx ,
                                           hh, kig := trg (hk).
Then h·, ·i defines a Riemannian metric on the finite-dimensional manifold Mx .
2.2. A Product Manifold Structure for M. M can be written globally as a product manifold,
with the factors given by the manifold of metrics inducing a given volume form and the manifold
of volume forms on M . We sketch the details of this here. All facts that are given can be found
(with proofs) either in [8, §1] or [3, §2.5.3].
   The set of smooth volume forms on M , denoted by V, is a Fréchet manifold. In fact, it is an open
subset of Ωn (M ), the Fréchet space of highest-order differential forms on M (i.e., C ∞ sections of
the line bundle Λn T ∗ M ), and therefore its tangent spaces are canonically identified with Ωn (M ).
   Given any volume form µ ∈ V and any n-form α ∈ Ωn (M ), there exists a unique C ∞ function,
denoted by (α/µ), such that
                                                    
                                                    α
(1)                                             α=      µ.
                                                    µ
If α is also a smooth volume form, then (α/µ) is additionally a strictly positive function. If g0
and g1 are two Riemannian metrics on M , then locally, the Radon-Nikodym derivative of µg1 with
respect to µg0 is given locally by
                                        s
                                   µ g1     det g1
                                                    q
(2)                                      =         = det(g0−1 g1 ).
                                   µg0      det g0
  Now, for any fixed volume form µ ∈ V, let Mµ ⊂ M denote the set of metrics inducing the
volume µ. It is a smooth submanifold of M [6, §8] with tangent space
                                     Tg Mµ = {h ∈ S | trg h = 0}.
This follows from the fact that the differential of the map g 7→ µg at the point g0 is h 7→ 12 trg0 (h)µg0
[3, Lemma 2.38].
   We now define a map
                                      iµ : V × Mµ → M
                                                         2/n
                                                         ν
                                              (ν, g) 7→        g.
                                                         µ
It is not hard to see that µiµ (ν,g) = ν, as well as that iµ is a diffeomorphism.
   Mµ inherits a Riemannian metric as a submanifold of (M, (·, ·)). We can also pull back the
L2 metric on M to V via iµ , namely by choosing any g ∈ Mµ and noting that iµ |V × {g} is an
embedding of V into M. A relatively straightforward computation then shows that this pull-back
metric is given by
                                     Z   
                                   4      α     β
(3)                   ((α, β))ν =                    dν,     α, β ∈ Ωn (M ) ∼
                                                                            = Tν V.
                                   n M ν        ν
4                                          BRIAN CLARKE


Thus, this metric is independent of our choices of g and µ. In fact, it is just the constant factor n4
times the most obvious Riemannian metric on V. Note that it is not hard to see that
                                        iµ (V × {g}) = P · g,
where P is the group of strictly positive functions on M , acting on M by pointwise multiplication.
Furthermore, the tangent space to iµ (V × {g}) at ρg, for any ρ ∈ P, is given by C ∞ (M ) · g.
2.3. Geodesics. As noted above, the geodesic equation of M can be solved explicitly (see [8,
Thm. 2.3], [9, Thm. 3.2]). We will not need it in full generality here, but we note that from the
geodesic equation, one can deduce that expg is not surjective for any g ∈ M. For a nice and explicit
presentation of this fact, see [9, §3]
   We will need the geodesics associated to the product manifold structure of M. They are given
in the following two propositions.
Proposition 1 ([8, Prop. 2.1]). The geodesic in V starting at ν0 with initial tangent α is given by
                                                 2
                                                t α
                                    νt = 1 +              ν0 .
                                                2 ν0
As a result, for every g0 ∈ M, the exponential mapping expg0 is a diffeomorphism from an open
set U ⊂ Tg0 (P · g0 ) onto P · g0 .
   Furthermore, if µ ∈ V and g ∈ Mµ , then iµ (V × {g}) is a totally geodesic submanifold.
Proposition 2 ([6, Thm. 8.9] and [8, Prop. 1.27, Prop. 2.2]). The submanifold Mµ is not totally
geodesic. However, it is a globally symmetric space, and the geodesic starting at g0 with initial
tangent g00 = h is given by
                                        gt = g0 exp(tH),
              −1
where H := g0 h.
  In particular, Mµ is geodesically complete, and expg is a diffeomorphism from Tg Mµ to Mµ for
any g ∈ Mµ .
   As we will see in Section 4, Propositions 1 and 2 are sufficient to prove that V and Mµ , together
with the Riemannian metrics induced from the L2 metric on M, are metric spaces. However, to
prove that the L2 metric on M itself induces a metric space structure, the geodesic equation is
insufficient due to the non-surjectivity of the exponential mapping.

                                3. Weak Riemannian manifolds
   On a finite-dimensional Riemannian manifold (N, γ)—one modeled on Rn —the tangent space
Tx N is, via a choice of coordinates, isomorphic to Rn for each x ∈ N . The equivalence of all scalar
products on Rn implies that the scalar product induced by the Riemannian metric, when viewed
as a scalar product on Rn , is equivalent to the Euclidean scalar product. In particular, it induces
the standard topology on Rn . One can then deduce that the induced distance function dγ of γ
is a metric (in the sense of metric spaces), and the metric topology of (N, dγ ) coincides with the
manifold topology of N .
   In the case of an infinite-dimensional Riemannian manifold (N, γ) modeled on a Hilbert or Fréchet
space E, we cannot necessarily say that the scalar product induced by γ on a tangent space Tx N
is equivalent to the Hilbert space scalar product of E. Therefore, the topology that γ induces on
Tx N may differ from the topology of E. Thus, we can distinguish two types of Riemannian metrics
on a Fréchet (or, as a special case, Hilbert) manifold. We call γ a strong Riemannian metric if
it induces the model space topology on each tangent space, and a weak Riemannian metric if it
induces a weaker topology. In the case of a proper Fréchet space (where the topology does not come
from any single norm), only weak Riemannian metrics are possible. This cements their importance
in global analysis.
                THE METRIC GEOMETRY OF THE MANIFOLD OF RIEMANNIAN METRICS                              5


   The subtle but important distinction between weak and strong Riemannian metrics leads to
a vast gulf in the two theories one can develop around each structure. For a strong Riemannian
metric, one can reproduce most of the important results in finite-dimensional Riemannian geometry.
For example, the Levi-Civita connection, geodesics, and the exponential mapping exist. A strong
Riemannian metric induces a distance function that gives a metric space structure on the manifold.
In addition, the metric topology agrees with the manifold topology.
   None of the above-mentioned results hold in general for weak Riemannian manifolds, though
they can be directly shown for many important examples.
   In this section, we will give some basic results on the distance function of a weak Riemannian
manifold. We have not found these results formally recorded anywhere, though they may be known
to experts in the field. Our approach essentially follows that of [11, §1.8], which treats the case of
strong Riemannian manifolds. We have made the necessary adjustments to the results and proofs
so that they hold in the weak case.

3.1. (Weak) Riemannian Fréchet manifolds. A Riemannian metric on a Fréchet manifold is
defined exactly analogously to one on a finite-dimensional manifold, modulo the distinction between
weak and strong metrics mentioned above.
   Recall that on a Banach manifold N modeled on a Banach space E, each tangent space Tx N
is naturally isomorphic to the model space E, the isomorphism being given by any choice of coor-
dinates around x (this choice is, of course, usually very non-canonical). The same holds true for
Fréchet manifolds, and we keep this in mind as we make the following definition.
Definition 3. Let N be a Fréchet manifold modeled on a Fréchet space E. A Riemannian metric
γ on N is a choice of scalar product γ(x) on Tx N for each x ∈ N , such that for each x ∈ N , the
following holds:
   (1) γ is smooth in the sense that if U is any open neighborhood of x and V, W are vector fields
       defined on U , then γ(·)(V, W ) : U → R is a smooth local function;
   (2) γ(x) is a continuous (i.e., bounded) bilinear mapping; and
   (3) γ(x) is positive definite on Tx N .
  Furthermore, γ is called
   (1) strong if the topology induced by γ coincides with the topology of the model space E; and
   (2) weak otherwise, i.e., if the topology induced by γ is weaker than the model space topology.
  The pair (N, γ) is called a Riemannian Fréchet manifold.
   To put it another way, (N, γ) is a strong Riemannian Fréchet manifold if its tangent spaces are
complete with respect to γ, and it is weak if the tangent spaces are incomplete with respect to γ.
   The first definition of weak Riemannian Hilbert manifolds that we know of (though our knowledge
is surely incomplete) is in [6], the paper that founded the study of the geometry of the manifold of
metrics. The generalization to weak Riemannian Fréchet manifolds is natural and has been used
in several works. In no particular order, here is a list of papers that consider weak Riemannian
manifolds (specifically, those that explicitly deal with the questions posed by “weakness” and are
not mentioned elsewhere in this paper): [1, 4, 7, 12, 13, 16, 17, 18, 19]. We have made no attempt
to make this list complete—it is simply a smattering of examples.
   Let (N, γ) be a Riemannian Fréchet manifold. Just as in the case of finite-dimensional Rie-
mannian manifolds, we can use γ to define a distance between points of N by taking the infima of
lengths of paths. It is then clear that this distance function is a pseudometric, i.e., it satisfies all
the properties of a metric except that the distance between distinct points need not be positive.
   As mentioned above, if γ is strong, then the distance function is in fact a metric. On the
other hand, there are examples [14, 15] of weak Riemannian manifolds where the induced distance
between any two points is zero! So there is no hope of a general theorem like in the strong case.
6                                          BRIAN CLARKE


3.2. The exponential mapping and distance function on a weak Riemannian manifold.
The problem in proving a general theorem on the distance function on a weak Riemannian manifold
is the following: for each point x on a strong Riemannian manifold (N, γ), a neighborhood of
0 ∈ Tx N contains an open γ-ball of some sufficiently small radius. However, if (N, γ) is a weak
Riemannian manifold, since the topology induced by γ is weaker than the manifold topology of
Tx N , an open neighborhood of 0 (in the manifold topology) need not necessarily contain any open
γ-balls.
   This phenomenon does indeed occur—it occurs in the examples of [14, 15] mentioned above, and
it in fact also occurs for the manifold of Riemannian metrics [9, Rmk. 3.5].
   The first result we can indeed show for weak Riemannian metrics is familiar from finite-dimen-
sional Riemannian geometry. The proof carries over, so we omit it here (or refer the reader to [3,
Prop. 2.23]).
Proposition 4. Let (N, γ) be a weak Riemannian manifold on which the Levi-Civita connection
exists. Let p ∈ N and v ∈ Tp N , and suppose that v is in the domain of expp . Then the geodesic
α(t) := expp (tv), t ∈ [0, 1], has length kvkγ .
   Unfortunately, we cannot prove much more that is useful about weak Riemannian manifolds
without first making a couple of assumptions on the exponential mapping. Basically, we want it
to exist and to be a diffeomorphism between some open sets—so we’ll have to assume that as well.
(Here again, there are examples [4, §1] where the exponential mapping exists but is not a local
diffeomorphism.) The next bit of terminology incorporates this, and also adds one technical detail
that we’ll soon need.
Definition 5. We call a weak Riemannian manifold (N, γ) normalizable at x if there are open
neighborhoods Ux ⊆ Tx N and Vx ⊆ N of 0 and x, respectively, such that
    (1) Ux is convex and
    (2) the exponential mapping expx exists and is a C 1 -diffeomorphism between Ux and Vx .
Note that the neighborhoods Ux and Vx are required to be open in the manifold topology of N .
We do not require that Ux be open in the topology induced by γ.
  We call (N, γ) normalizable if it is normalizable at each x ∈ N .
Definition 6. Let (N, γ) be a weak Riemannian manifold and let x ∈ N . We denote by Sx N ⊂ Tx N
the unit sphere, i.e.,
                                 Sx N = {v ∈ Tx N | kvkγ = 1}.
  For the rest of this section, let (N, γ) be a weak Riemannian manifold that is normalizable at a
point x ∈ N , and retain the notation of Definition 5.
Lemma 7. The function
                            R : Tx N \ {0} → R≥0
                                         v 7→ sup{r ∈ R≥0 | r · v ∈ Ux },
is continuous.
Proof. R is the multiplicative inverse of the Minkowski functional of Ux , so the result follows from
[20, II.1.6] by the convexity and openness of Ux .                                                  
   The following lemma shows that the exponential mapping of a weak Riemannian manifold that
is normalizable at x is defined on some nonzero vector pointing in each direction in Tx N .
Lemma 8. For each v ∈ Tx N \ {0}, R(v) > 0.
Proof. Let v ∈ Tx N be given. Since Tx N with its manifold topology is a topological vector space
and Ux is a neighborhood of the origin, there is some  > 0 such that  · v ∈ Ux .             
                 THE METRIC GEOMETRY OF THE MANIFOLD OF RIEMANNIAN METRICS                            7


Remark 9. Lemma 8 does not imply that R(v) is uniformly bounded away from zero, even if we
restrict the domain of R to Sx N at each x ∈ N .

   The next two propositions allow us to control the lengths of paths based at x, provided they lie
within the neighborhood Ux . We will remark below on how these statements have been weakened
from the strong case.

Proposition 10. Let r(s) · v(s) ∈ Ux , s ∈ [0, 1], be a path in Ux such that v(s) ∈ Sx N , r(s) ∈ R≥0 .
(That is, we express the path in polar coordinates.) We define a path α by α(s) := expx (r(s)v(s)),
s ∈ [0, 1]. Then
                                            L(α) ≥ |r(1) − r(0)|,
with equality if and only if v(s) is constant and r0 (s) ≥ 0.

Proof. By Lemmas 7 and 8, as well as the compactness of [0, 1], there exist , δ > 0 such that if

                  (s, t) ∈ U,δ := (s, t) ∈ R2 | s ∈ [0, 1], t ∈ [−, r(s) + δ] ,
                                  

then t · v(s) ∈ Ux .
  We define a one-parameter family of paths in N by

                                   cs (t) := exp(t · v(s)),       (s, t) ∈ U,δ

Note that for each fixed s, the path t 7→ cs (t) is a geodesic with

(4)                              k∂t cs (t)kγ ≡ k∂t cs (0)kγ = kv(s)kγ = 1.

Note also that the image of the family of paths c· (·) is a singular surface in N parametrized by the
coordinates (s, t).
   Keeping this in mind, we compute
                                                                                              
                                                 ∇                                     ∇
               ∂t γ (∂s cs (t), ∂t cs (t)) = γ      ∂s cs (t), ∂t cs (t) + γ ∂s cs (t), ∂t cs (t)
                                                 ∂t                                    ∂t
                                                                        
                                                 ∇
                                           =γ       ∂t cs (t), ∂t cs (t)
(5)                                              ∂s
                                             1
                                           = ∂s γ (∂t cs (t), ∂t cs (t))
                                             2
                                           = 0.

Here, the second line holds because
      • s and t are coordinate functions, and hence (covariant) derivatives in the two directions
        commute, and
                                         ∇
      • t 7→ cs (t) is a geodesic, hence ∂t ∂t cs (t) = 0.
The last line follows directly from (4).
  From (5), we immediately see that

                                              γ (∂s cs (t), ∂t cs (t))

is independent of t. However, we also have that cs (0) = x for all s, implying that ∂s cs (0) = 0, thus

                               0 = γ(∂s cs (0), ∂t cs (0)) = γ(∂s cs (t), ∂t cs (t))

for all t. That is, ∂s cs (t) and ∂t cs (t) are orthogonal for all s and t.
8                                                BRIAN CLARKE


    We now estimate:
                                                         2
                                            d
                             kα0 (s)k2γ =      cs (r(s))
                                            ds           γ
                                                                             2
                                       = ∂s cs (r(s)) + r0 (s)∂r cs (r(s)) γ
                                       = k∂s cs (r(s))k2γ + |r0 (s)|2 k∂r cs (r(s))k2γ
                                       ≥ |r0 (s)|2 .
Here, in the third line, we have used orthogonality of ∂s cs (t) and ∂t cs (t). In the last line, we have
used (4). Note that equality holds if and only if k∂s cs (r(s))kγ ≡ 0.
  Finally, we see that
                        Z 1               Z 1              Z 1
                                                0
               L(α) =         0
                            kα (s)kγ ds ≥     |r (s)| ds ≥     r0 (s) ds = |r(1) − r(0)|,
                         0                      0                  0
which proves the desired inequality. We note that the first inequality is an equality if and only if
k∂s cs (r(s))kγ ≡ 0 (see the previous paragraph) and the second inequality is an equality if and only
if r0 (s) ≥ 0 for all s.                                                                           
Proposition 11. Suppose y ∈ Vx with exp−1
                                       x (y) = v. Then the path
                                    α : [0, 1] → Vx ,    α(t) = expx (t · v)
satisfies L(α) = kvkγ , and α is of minimal length among all paths in Vx from x to y. Furthermore,
α is the unique minimal path (up to reparametrization) in Vx from x to y.
Remark 12. Note that we will only show that α is minimal only among paths (or geodesics) in
Vx , not all paths (or geodesics) in N . In particular, we cannot conclude from Proposition 11 that
dγ (x, y) = L(α), as is done in the case of a strong Riemannian manifold, where the neighborhood
Vx contains a dγ -ball of positive radius.
Proof. The equality L(α) = kvkγ holds by Proposition 4.
  A path η(s), s ∈ [0, 1], in Vx from x to y corresponds via exp−1
                                                                 x to a path r(s) · v(s) in Ux with
v(s) ∈ Sx N , r(0) = 0 and r(1) · v(1) = v, implying |r(1)| = kvkγ . By Proposition 10, we therefore
have that
(6)                                          L(η) ≥ kvkγ = L(α),
immediately implying minimality of α.
   Let equality hold in (6). Again by Proposition 10, this implies v(s) is constant and r0 (s) ≥ 0 for
all s. However, this means that η is just a reparametrization of α, proving the second statement. 
  As an obvious result of Proposition 11, we get the following criterion for a weak Riemannian
manifold to be a metric space. It requires rather strong assumptions which could probably be
weakened significantly, but it will be sufficient for some purposes that we have in mind.
Theorem 13. Let (N, γ) be a weak Riemannian manifold. Suppose that for some x ∈ N , the expo-
nential mapping expx is a diffeomorphism between an open (in the manifold topology) neighborhood
Ux of 0 ∈ Tx N and N .
  Then (N, dγ ), where dγ is the Riemannian distance function of γ, is a metric space.
Proof. Let y ∈ N . It remains to show that if y 6= x, then d(x, y) > 0. But if exp−1
                                                                                   x (y) = v, then
Proposition 11 shows that the shortest path from x to y in N is expx (t · v), which has length kvk.
Therefore d(x, y) = kvk > 0.                                                                     
  By Propositions 1 and 2, we see that V and Mµ satisfy the prerequisites of the theorem, so we
get the following two corollaries.
                 THE METRIC GEOMETRY OF THE MANIFOLD OF RIEMANNIAN METRICS                             9


Corollary 14. The weak Riemannian metric ((·, ·)) (cf. (3)) induces a metric space structure on
V.
Corollary 15. The L2 metric on M induces a metric space structure on the submanifold Mµ .
   (M, (·, ·)) itself certainly does not satisfy the prerequisites of Theorem 13, as is explicitly shown
in [9, §3]. Therefore, we will have to use a different strategy in this case.

                                       4. M is a metric space
   Proving that d is a metric will be done by finding a manifestly positive-definite metric (in the
sense of metric spaces) on M that in some way bounds the d-distance between two points from
below, implying that it is positive. First, though, we will prove a preliminary result that bounds
from below the distance between metrics with inducing differing volume forms.

4.1. Lipschitz continuity of the square root of the volume. We wish to show Lipschitz
continuity of the square root of the volume function on M. In fact, the following lemma shows
that for any measurable Y ⊆ M , the function defined by
                                              p
                                         g̃ 7→ Vol(Y, g̃)
is Lipschitz with respect to d. Using this as a first step to proving that d is a metric takes its
inspiration from [14, §3.3].
Lemma 16. Let g0 , g1 ∈ M. Then for any measurable subset Y ⊆ M ,
                                                       √
                         p              p                n
                           Vol(Y, g1 ) − Vol(Y, g0 ) ≤     d(g0 , g1 ).
                                                        4
Proof. Let gt , t ∈ [0, 1], be any path from g0 to g1 , and define ht := gt0 . We compute
                                             Z          Z              Z
                                                                            1
                         ∂t Vol(Y, gt ) = ∂t    µgt =       ∂ t µgt =          trgt (ht ) µgt
                                              Y           Y             Y 2
                                          Z         1/2  Z                       1/2
                                                            1                2
(7)                                     ≤       µ gt              tr   (h
                                                                     gt t  )   µ gt
                                             Y              4 Y
                                                           Z                     1/2
                                          1p                               2
                                        ≤      Vol(Y, gt )       trgt (ht ) µgt         ,
                                          2                   M

where the first line follows from [3, Lemma 2.38], the second line follows from Hölder’s inequality,
and the last line from the nonnegativity of trgt (ht )2 . Now, let A and B be any n × n matrices, and
denote their traceless parts by AT and B T , respectively. We then have the formula
                                                                              
                                                      1                 1
                         tr(AB) = tr           AT + tr(A)I        B T + tr(B)I
                                                      n                 n
(8)
                                                        1
                                   = tr AT B T + tr(A) tr(B).
                                                   
                                                        n
The second line follows from the fact that traceless and pure trace matrices are orthogonal in the
scalar product defined by tr(AB). We have also used tr I = n.
   Using (8) with the gt -trace and A = B = ht , we see that
                                                               1
                                    trgt (h2t ) = trgt (hTt )2 + trgt (ht )2 ,
                                                                 n
implying
                          trgt (ht )2 = n trgt (h2t ) − trgt (hTt )2 ≤ n trgt (h2t ),
                                                                    
10                                               BRIAN CLARKE


since trgt (hTt )2 ≥ 0. Applying this to (7) gives
                  

                                                             Z                    1/2
                                             1p                            2
                            ∂t Vol(Y, gt ) ≤     Vol(Y, gt ) n      trgt (ht ) µgt
(9)                                          2                   M
                                             √ p
                                               n
                                           ≤       Vol(Y, gt )kht kgt .
                                              2
     We next compute
                                               Z 1 p                   Z 1
               p                p                                          1 ∂t Vol(Y, gt )
                   Vol(Y, g1 ) − Vol(Y, g0 ) =    ∂t Vol(Y, gt ) dt =         p             dt
                                                0                       0 2     Vol(Y, gt )
(10)                                           Z 1√                √
                                                    n                n
                                             ≤        kht kgt dt =     L(gt ),
                                                0  4                4
where the inequality follows from (9). Since this holds for all paths from g0 to g1 , and we can
repeat the computation with g0 and g1 interchanged, it implies the result immediately.         

  We note that Lemma 16 in particular gives a positive lower bound on the distance between two
metrics in M that have different total volumes—so we must now deal with the case where the two
metrics have the same total volume.

4.2. A (positive-definite) metric on M. For the remainder of the paper, we fix an arbitrary
reference metric g ∈ M.
   We begin by defining a function on M × M and showing that it is indeed a metric.
Definition 17. Consider Mx = {g̃ ∈ Sx | g̃ > 0} (cf. Section 2.1). Define a Riemannian metric
h·, ·i0 on Mx given by
                           hh, ki0g̃ = trg̃ (hk) det g(x)−1 g̃   ∀h, k ∈ Tg̃ Mx ∼
                                                                                = Sx .
(Recall that g ∈ M is our fixed reference element.) We denote by θxg the Riemannian distance
function of h·, ·i0 .
   Note that θxg is automatically positive definite, since it is the distance function of a Riemannian
metric on a finite-dimensional manifold. By integrating it in x, we can pass from a metric on Mx
to a function on M × M as follows:
Definition 18. For any measurable Y ⊆ M , define a function ΘY : M × M → R by
                                           Z
                           ΘY (g0 , g1 ) =   θxg (g0 (x), g1 (x)) µg (x).
                                                    Y

     We have omitted the metric g from the notation for ΘY . The next lemma justifies this choice.
Lemma 19. ΘY does not depend on the choice of g ∈ M in the above definition. That is, if we
choose any other g̃ ∈ M and define h·, ·i0 and θxg̃ with respect to this new reference metric, then
                       Z                               Z
                         θxg (g0 (x), g1 (x)) µg (x) =   θxg̃ (g0 (x), g1 (x)) µg̃ (x)
                            Y                                Y

Proof. Let g̃ ∈ M be any other metric. Recall that θxg was the distance function associated to
the Riemannian metric h·, ·i0 on Mx , and the metric g enters in the definition of this Riemannian
metric. Take a path gt (x) in Mx . For now, let’s put g and g̃ back in the notation, so that we can
write formulas unambiguously. For example, if we use g to define h·, ·i0 , we write Lg (gt (x)) for the
length of gt (x) w.r.t. h·, ·i0 ; if we use g̃ in the definition, we write Lg̃ (gt (x)) for the length; and
similarly for other notation.
                 THE METRIC GEOMETRY OF THE MANIFOLD OF RIEMANNIAN METRICS                                 11


   Using the definitions of ΘgY and θxg , where infima are always taken over paths gt (x) from g0 (x)
to g1 (x), and where ht (x) := gt (x)0 , we can compute:
                             Z
              g
             ΘY (g0 , g1 ) =    θxg (g0 (x), g1 (x)) µg (x)
                              Y
                             Z  Z 1q                                      
                           =       inf                 0       0  0
                                               hgt (x) , gt (x) igt (x) dt µg (x)
                              Y          0
                             Z         Z 1s                                      !
                                                                   det g t (x)     p
                           =       inf         trgt (x) (ht (x)2 )             dt   det g(x) dx1 · · · dxn
                              Y          0                         det g(x)
                             Z         Z 1s                                      !
                                                                   det g t (x)     p
                           =       inf         trgt (x) (ht (x)2 )             dt   det g̃(x) dx1 · · · dxn
                              Y          0                         det  g̃(x)
                        = Θg̃Y (g0 , g1 ),
where the last line follows from running the first lines of the computation through in reverse.            
Lemma 20. Let any Y ⊆ M be given. Then ΘY is a pseudometric on M, and ΘM is a metric
(in the sense of metric spaces).
   Furthermore, if Y1 ⊂ Y2 , then ΘY1 (g0 , g1 ) ≤ ΘY2 (g0 , g1 ) for all g0 , g1 ∈ M.
Proof. Nonnegativity, vanishing distance for equal elements, symmetry and the triangle inequality
are clear from the corresponding properties for θxg .
   That ΘM is positive definite is also not hard to prove. Since θxg is a metric on Mx , θxg (g0 (x), g1 (x))
is positive whenever g0 (x) 6= g1 (x). But since g0 and g1 are smooth metrics, if they differ at a point,
they differ over an open neighborhood of that point. Hence the integral of θxg (g0 (x), g1 (x)) must be
positive.
   The second statement follows immediately from nonnegativity of θxg .                                    
4.3. Proof of the main result. We have set up everything we need to prove the main result of
this section—that d is a metric. To do this, we use Lemma 16 in order to control the volume of the
metrics making up a path in terms of the length of that path, combined with a Hölder’s inequality
argument, and show that the pseudometrics ΘY provide a lower bound for the distance between
elements of M as measured by d.
Proposition 21. For any Y ⊆ M and g0 , g1 ∈ M, we have the following inequality:
                                               √                  p           
                   ΘY (g0 , g1 ) ≤ d(g0 , g1 )    n d(g0 , g1 ) + 2 Vol(M, g0 ) .
In particular, ΘY is a continuous pseudometric (w.r.t. d).
Proof. By Lemma 20, we need only prove the inequality for Y = M , and then it follows for any
subset.
   We can clearly find a path gt from g0 to g1 with L(gt ) ≤ 2d(g0 , g1 ). Then for any τ ∈ [0, 1], we
get
                                                               4 p                    p
          2d(g0 , g1 ) ≥ L(gt ) ≥ L gt |[0,τ ] ≥ d(g0 , gτ ) ≥ √       Vol(M, gτ ) − Vol(M, g0 ) ,
                                                                 n
where the last inequality is Lemma 16. In particular, we get
                                                                 √
                            p                   p                   n
(11)                           Vol(M, gτ ) ≤ Vol(M, g0 ) +            d(g0 , g1 ) =: V
                                                                   2
for all τ ∈ [0, 1].
   To find the length of gt , we first integrate hgt0 , gt0 i over x ∈ M , then take the square root, and
finally integrate over t. Ideally, we would wish to change the order of integration, so that we first
12                                               BRIAN CLARKE


integrate over t, then over x. We cannot do this exactly, but we can bound the computation of the
length from below by an expression where we integrate in the opposite order, and this expression
will involve θxg and ΘM . So let’s see how this works.
   Let ht := gt0 . From Hölder’s inequality,
                      Z q                      Z      1/2 Z                  1/2
                            trgt (h2t ) dµgt ≤    dµgt         trgt (h2t ) dµgt      ,
                      M                               M                 M
which gives
                              Z                      1/2                   Z
                                                                    1
                                                                                 q
                 kht kgt =         trgt (h2t ) dµgt          ≥p                   trgt (h2t ) dµgt
(12)                           M                               Vol(M, gt )   M
                               Z
                         1
                                    q
                          ≥          trgt (h2t ) dµgt ,
                         V M
where we have also used (11). To remove the t-dependence from the volume element, we use
                                         √
                                           det gt     p
                                µgt = √           µg = det g −1 gt µg .
                                           det g
We then rewrite (12) as
                        Z q                              Z q
                      1              2                 1
(13)       kht kgt ≥                          −1
                              trgt (ht ) det g gt µg =           hht (x), ht (x)i0gt (x) µg (x),
                     V M                               V M
where we have used the Riemannian metric h·, ·i0 on Mx (cf. Definition 17).
    Since we have removed the t-dependence from the measure above, we can change the order of
integration in the calculation of the length of gt :
                               Z 1
                                                    1 1
                                                      Z Z q
                      L(gt ) =      kht kgt dt ≥                    hht (x), ht (x)i0gt (x) µg (x) dt
                                 0                 V 0 M
                                   Z Z 1q
                                1
                             =                 hht (x), ht (x)i0gt (x) dt µg (x).
                               V M 0
Now we concentrate on the t-integral in the expression above. Since gt (x) is a path in Mx from
g0 (x) to g1 (x) with tangents ht (x), the t-integral is actually the length of gt (x) with respect to
h·, ·i0 . But by definition, this length is bounded from below by θxg (g0 (x), g1 (x)). Therefore, we get
the estimate                           Z
                                     1                                        1
                          L(gt ) ≥          θxg (g0 (x), g1 (x)) µg (x) = ΘM (g0 , g1 ).
                                     V M                                     V
But now the result is immediate given (11) and the fact that we have assumed L(gt ) ≤ 2d(g0 , g1 ). 
  The previous proposition gives us the main result of this paper immediately. Since ΘM is a
(positive-definite) metric by Lemma 20, ΘM (g0 , g1 ) > 0 for any g0 6= g1 . From this, Proposition 21
immediately implies that d(g0 , g1 ) > 0 as well. Since we have already mentioned that the distance
function induced by a weak Riemannian manifold is automatically a pseudometric, we have proved:
Theorem 22. (M, d), where d is the distance function induced from the L2 metric (·, ·), is a metric
space.
Remark 23. As already noted, in [15], Michor and Mumford studied weak Riemannian manifolds
where the induced distance between all points is zero. They also showed that the sectional curvature
is unbounded from above at each point—thus, the vanishing of the distance function can be related
to the fact that the space curls up on itself arbitrarily tightly. In a sense, our theorem confirms this
“mechanism” for allowing the induced distance to vanish, since as we already noted in Section 2.1,
the sectional curvature of (M, (·, ·)) is bounded from above—indeed, it is nonpositive—preventing
the pathologies found by Michor and Mumford.
                  THE METRIC GEOMETRY OF THE MANIFOLD OF RIEMANNIAN METRICS                                          13


   Theorem 22 is a first step in investigating the metric geometry of M—that is, it is certainly
a prerequisite for M itself (rather than the quotient space where elements at distance zero are
identified) to have any metric geometry at all. In a forthcoming paper [2], motivated by the
appearance of (M, (·, ·)) in Teichmüller theory and the important results in that field concerning
the completion of the Weil-Petersson metric, we will continue this study by giving a description of
the completion of (M, d).

                                                   References
 [1] Leonardo Biliotti, The exponential map of a weak riemannian Hilbert manifold, Illinois J. Math. 48 (2004), no. 4,
     1191–1206.
 [2] Brian Clarke, The completion of the manifold of Riemannian metrics, preprint, 0904.0177v1.
 [3]         , The completion of the manifold of Riemannian metrics with respect to its L2 metric, Ph.D. thesis,
     University of Leipzig, 2009, arXiv:0904.0159v1.
 [4] Adrian Constantin and Boris Kolev, Geodesic flow on the diffeomorphism group of the circle, Comment. Math.
     Helv. 78 (2003), 787–804.
 [5] Bryce S. DeWitt, Quantum theory of gravity. I. The canonical theory, Phys. Rev. 160 (1967), no. 5, 1113–1148.
 [6] David G. Ebin, The manifold of Riemannian metrics, Global analysis (Shiing-Shen Chern and Steven Smale,
     eds.), Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics, vol. 15, American Mathematical Society, Providence, 1970,
     pp. 11–40.
 [7] David G. Ebin and Jerrold Marsden, Groups of diffeomorphisms and the motion of an incompressible fluid, Ann.
     of Math. (2) 92 (1970), no. 1, 102–163.
 [8] Daniel S. Freed and David Groisser, The basic geometry of the manifold of Riemannian metrics and of its quotient
     by the diffeomorphism group, Michigan Math. J. 36 (1989), 323–344.
 [9] Olga Gil-Medrano and Peter W. Michor, The Riemannian manifold of all Riemannian metrics, Quart. J. Math.
     Oxford Ser. (2) 42 (1991), no. 166, 183–202, arXiv:math/9201259.
[10] Richard S. Hamilton, The inverse function theorem of Nash and Moser, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 7 (1982), no. 1,
     65–222.
[11] Wilhelm P. A. Klingenberg, Riemannian geometry, 2nd ed., de Gruyter Studies in Mathematics, no. 1, Walter
     de Gruyter & Co., Berlin–New York, 1995.
[12] Jerrold Marsden, Darboux’s theorem fails for weak symplectic forms, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 32 (1972), no. 2,
     590–592.
[13] Peter W. Michor and David Mumford, An overview of the Riemannian metrics on spaces of curves using the
     Hamiltonian approach, arXiv:math/0605009v2.
[14]         , Vanishing geodesic distance on spaces of submanifolds and diffeomorphisms, Doc. Math. 10 (2005),
     217–245, arXiv:math/0409303.
[15]         , Riemannian geometries on spaces of plane curves, J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS) 8 (2006), no. 1, 1–48,
     arXiv:math.DG/0312384.
[16] Peter W. Michor and Tudor S. Ratiu, On the geometry of the Virasoro-Bott group, J. Lie Theory 8 (1998),
     293–309.
[17] Gerard Misiolek, Stability of flows of ideal fluids and the geometry of the group of diffeomorphisms, Indiana Univ.
     Math. J. 42 (1993), no. 1, 215–235.
[18]         , Conjugate points in Dµ (T 2 ), Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 124 (1996), no. 3, 977–982.
[19]         , Exponential maps of Sobolev metrics on loop groups, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 127 (1999), no. 8, 2475–
     2482.
[20] Helmut H. Schaefer, Topological vector spaces, 2nd ed., Graduate Texts in Mathematics, no. 3, Springer, New
     York, 1999.
[21] Anthony J. Tromba, Teichmüller theory in Riemannian geometry, Birkhäuser, Basel, 1992.

  Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Inselstraße 22, 04103 Leipzig, Germany;
clarke@mis.mpg.de
