                                          A BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS WITH
                                                             EPSILON-REGULARITY

                                                                 BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA



                                                  Abstract. Suppose V is a class of stationary integral n-varifolds in B2n+k (0) ⊂ Rn+k which is
                                                  closed under weak limits, homotheties, rotations, and disjoint decomposition, and suppose that V
                                                  satisfies an ε-regularity property near planes of (integer) multiplicity ≤ Q ∈ {2, 3, . . . }. This last




arXiv:2606.01511v1 [math.DG] 1 Jun 2026
                                                  condition, more precisely, requires that there be a constant ϵ = ϵ(V, Q) ∈ (0, 1) such that if V ∈ V
                                                  is, in the unit cylinder Rk × B1n (0), ϵ-close as varifolds to the plane {0} × Rn taken with multiplicity
                                                  ≤ Q then, in the half-cylinder Rk × B1/2    n
                                                                                                 (0), V is represented by the graph of a Lipschitz multi-
                                                                           n
                                                  valued function over B1/2 (0) with uniform quantitative estimates of a C 1,α nature. For any varifold
                                                  in such a class V, we prove that the set of branch points with density ≤ Q has Hausdorff dimension
                                                  ≤ n − 2.
                                                      By choosing suitable V, a direct consequence of this result and the recently established regularity
                                                  theorems in [BKMW25, MW24] is that if V is a stationary integral n-varifold which is either: (a)
                                                  represented by the graph of a 2-valued Lipschitz function; or (b) codimension one, stable, and with
                                                  no classical singularities of density < Q, then the Hausdorff dimension of the density Q branch set
                                                  (Q = 2 in (a)) is at most n − 2.
                                                      The result in (a) together with the earlier work of Becker-Kahn [BK17] improves on the recent
                                                  work of Hirsch–Spolaor [HS24] (which proved the singular-set dimension upper bound n − 1 for
                                                  stationary 2-valued Lipschitz graphs) by providing a structural decomposition of the singular set
                                                  as the union of a piece contained within an (n − 1)-dimensional C 1,α submanifold and a piece that
                                                  is a closed set of Hausdorff dimension ≤ n − 2.
                                                      The varifold class in (b) includes as a special case area minimising hypersurfaces mod p; thus, our
                                                  result in this case together with [MW24] subsumes the recent work of De Lellis–Hirsch–Marchese–
                                                  Spolaor–Stuvard [DLHM+ 22] (while also providing the additional conclusion that the mod p min-
                                                  imising hypersurface near every branch point is a Lipschitz multi-valued graph with generalised-C 1,α
                                                  regularity).
                                                      Our proof utilises the planar frequency function introduced by the first and third authors in
                                                  their work on area minimising currents ([KW23a]), and thus does not require the Almgren center
                                                  manifold for the analysis of branch points except in a single, geometrically canonical case where
                                                  the center manifold satisfies additional simplifying properties. We prove that the planar frequency
                                                  is approximately monotone at density Q branch points for V ∈ V. We then partition the density Q
                                                  branch set into two pieces, namely those points where the planar frequency value is ̸= 2 and those
                                                  where it is exactly 2. The former we show can be stratified, directly using the planar frequency
                                                  function, by the spine dimension of tangent maps relative to the tangent plane at branch points.
                                                  For any point in the latter, we construct a single center manifold which touches V at that point
                                                  and at all nearby branch points of the same type, and stratify such branch points by the spine
                                                  dimension of the tangent maps arising from a linearisation procedure of V relative to this center
                                                  manifold.
                                                      For situations where energy convergence in the center-manifold linearisation procedure is not
                                                  readily available, our analysis uses an elegant alternative argument of Hirsch–Spolaor in [HS24]
                                                  that treats these tangent maps as multi-valued gradient Young measures.




                                                                                                                    Contents
                                          1.     Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2

                                               1.1.     Main results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    5
                                                                                                                              1
2                            BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

         1.2.     Overview of the proof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
    2.     Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
    3.     Planar Frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
         3.1.     Approximate monotonicity of the planar frequency function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
         3.2.     Dimension bound for branch points with planar frequency ̸= 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
    4.     Dimension Bound on Planar Frequency ≥ 2 Branch Points via Center Manifold . . . . . . . . 40
         4.1.     Construction of a center manifold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
         4.2.     Construction of normal graph and its decay properties. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
         4.3.     Frequency relative to center manifold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
         4.4.     Center manifold blow-up and conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
    Appendix A.                Energy Convergence for Coarse Blow-Ups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
    Appendix B.                Multi-Valued Gradient Young Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
         B.1.      Stationary Gradient Q-Young Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
    References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117




                                                                       1. Introduction
Understanding the size of the branch set of general stationary integral n-varifolds is a question
lying at the heart of geometric measure theory. A well-known open question is whether the singular
set (or, equivalently, the branch set) can have positive Hn -measure.1 Even the existence question,
namely whether within a given closed Riemannian manifold (M n+k , g) one can always find a closed,
partially regular, n-dimensional minimal surface, is completely open except when k = 1 (or n = 1).
The Almgren–Pitts min-max theory provides the existence of a stationary integral n-varifold, but
extremely little is known about its regularity, precisely due to the possibility of a large branch set.
Indeed, essentially all that is known in this generality is that the (open) set of regular points is
a dense subset of the support of the varifold, which follows from the regularity theory of Allard
[All72].
Let us briefly elaborate on two situations where significant progress has been made. The first is
when the codimension is one and the varifold is additionally known to be stable; this is the situation
one has in the Almgren–Pitts min-max theory when k = 1. The work of Schoen–Simon [SS81] gives
a regularity and compactness theory for stable minimal hypersurfaces which are a priori known to
have sufficiently small singular sets (an assumption which, by virtue of the regularity theory for
area-minimising hypersurfaces, can be verified in the context of the Almgren–Pitts min-max the-
ory), showing that the singular set must in fact have Hausdorff dimension ≤ n − 7; see also the
recent breakthrough of Bellettini [Bel25] for extensions. Work of the third author [Wic14] pro-
vides a generalisation of the Schoen–Simon theory. This latter theory has been utilised to give an
alternative proof of the existence of minimal hypersurfaces in closed Riemannian manifolds; this
approach uses, in place of direct varifold min-max constructions, a much more elementary PDE
1We note that when the mean curvature is non-zero singular sets of positive Hn -measure can occur, even if the mean
curvature is arbitrarily close to 0 in L∞ .
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                   3

theoretic min-max principle applied to the Allen–Cahn equation ([Gua18]). The energy concen-
tration set arising from these PDE min-max solutions is a stationary integral varifold ([HT00]) to
which the regularity theory of [Wic14] applies (see [TW12]). Most recently, the work [Wic14] has
been adapted in a similar phase-transition approach to the existence of optimally-regular, constant-
mean-curvature and prescribed-mean-curvature hypersurfaces in closed Riemannian manifolds (see
[BW18, BW19, BW20]). On the regularity side, building on the methods of [Wic14] and a key
estimate from [Bel25] (and aided also by an intermediate result of Hong–Li–Wang ([HLW24])), a
sharp regularity and compactness theory for stable immersed hypersurfaces whose singular (i.e.
non-immersed) points form an Hn−2 -null set has very recently been established by the second au-
thor and Xiao ([MX26]), giving the conclusion that the singular set has Hausdorff dimension at
most n − 7.
One of the key results in [SS81, Wic14] is showing that branch points do not occur under the given
assumptions, and it is through ruling out branch points entirely that one is able to deduce further
information on the size of the singular set. This is analogous to how in the classical regularity
theory of area minimising hypersurfaces, one first rules out branch points using a decomposition of
the current into boundaries of Caccioppoli sets (see [Sim83]), whose singular points, by a theorem
of De Giorgi ([DG61], see also [Sim83]), cannot have tangent cones which are planes. As such, the
branch set is empty in these situations.
The other situation where significant progress has been made on the regularity question is area-
minimising rectifiable currents of codimension ≥ 2. The Federer–Fleming compactness theorem
([FF60]) implies the existence of area (mass)-minimising integral currents (cycles) arising as rep-
resentatives of non-trivial integral homology classes of compact Riemannian manifolds. Similarly,
subject to appropriate conditions, this powerful compactness theorem also provides solutions to the
(oriented) Plateau problem, producing area-minimisers in their relative homology classes. When
the codimension is ≥ 2, these solutions can develop branch points, and it is precisely for this rea-
son that the regularity question in higher codimension is significantly more complicated than in
codimension 1.
Almgren’s monumental 1983 work [Alm00] (clarified later by De Lellis–Spadaro [DLS14, DLS16a,
DLS16b]) showed that the Hausdorff dimension of the (interior) singular set of such a minimiser T
is ≤ n − 2 where n is the dimension of T . This bound is optimal when the codimension is ≥ 2 (but
can be improved to ≤ n−7 in codimension 1 as discussed above). With regard to Almgren’s method
of proof, a major source of additional difficulties is a rather complicated iterative construction of
so-called center manifolds corresponding to each branch point. This aspect of the classical theory,
and the exceeding technical output needed for this procedure, seem unavoidable if the question of
the size of the singular set is prioritised and studied in isolation (as done in the classical theory).
Very recently, a new framework for this problem has been developed by the first and the third
author (see [KW23a, KW23b, KW26a, KW26b, KW26c]). In this approach, the focus is shifted to
the local structure of the current. In particular, the question of Hn−2 -a.e. uniqueness of tangent
cones is tied intimately to the question of the size of the singular set (and to subsequent structural
questions). By introducing planar frequency – a new intrinsic frequency function for the current
which is shown to be approximately monotone subject to a decay condition – this approach simul-
taneously resolves a number of questions without employing center manifolds; namely: the Hn−2
a.e. uniqueness of tangent cones; the dimension of the part of the branch set that is most technically
demanding (from the classical view point of using center manifolds); local structural decomposi-
tion of this part as a finite union of disjoint locally (n − 2)-rectifiable pieces; and a similar local
structural decomposition of the set of all non-branch point singularities. This is then followed by
the dimension bound for the full singular set (and other outcomes), for which a center manifold is
invoked only to handle a canonical case where this device becomes necessary and at the same time,
4                BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

importantly, satisfies key additional geometric properties. In addition to providing a considerable
simplification of Almgren’s argument, this limited use of center manifolds is in fact what paves the
way to a general local structural study of the current, giving a higher-dimensional generalization
of the two-dimensional theory of Chang, White, and Micallef–White ([Cha88, Whi83, MW95]).
The specific overall new results obtained, in addition to Hn−2 -a.e. uniqueness of tangent cones,
include: higher order asymptotics at Hn−2 -a.e. branch point; a local structural decomposition of
the singular set into a finite disjoint union of locally compact, locally (n − 2)-rectifiable sets; and
frequency conditions for a branch point to have a neighborhood in which the support of the current
is homeomorphic to an n-disk and admits a C 1,µ parameterisation – a conclusion directly anal-
ogous to the Micallef–White asymptotic description of a two-dimensional current near a branch
point where the current is irreducible. We mention for completeness that in contemporaneous and
independent work, De Lellis and Skorobogatova ([DLS25, DLS23]) have taken an approach based
on Almgren’s iterative center manifold constructions for all branch points, which together with
the work of the second author with De Lellis and Skorobogatova ([DLMS23]) provides two of the
above conclusions: Hn−2 -a.e. uniqueness of tangent cones and countable (n − 2)-rectifiability of the
singular set. These two approaches are conceptually and technically significantly different, except
for a certain excess-decay lemma in [DLMS23] and [KW23b] – based in part, in either case, on
[Wic14] – which is indispensable for both approaches.

As previously mentioned, when the ambient manifold has trivial homology of a certain degree one
can attempt to find a minimal surface of that dimension using instead the Almgren–Pitts min-
max theory, however this object is not area minimising and is just a stationary integral varifold
(conceivably with a form of Morse index control that could be exploited). Any further partial
regularity conclusion has, to date, been unobtainable precisely due to a lack of understanding of
the branch set of stationary varifolds.

In the present work, we investigate the size of the branch set of stationary integral n-varifolds
V in situations where one has an ε-regularity property near planes of multiplicity at most some
fixed Q ∈ {2, 3, . . . }. The ε-regularity property (see Definition 1.2) requires that for any integer
Q′ ∈ {2, 3, . . . , Q}, the structure of V locally about a density Q′ branch point is given by the graph
of a Lipschitz Q′ -valued function, which furthermore is generalised-C 1,α (see Definition 2.1). In
turn, this reduces the problem to understanding the size of the density Q′ branch set for Lipschitz
functions f : B1n (0) → AQ′ (Rk ) whose graphs are stationary for area, and furthermore satisfy
an ε-regularity property when ∥Df ∥L2 (B1n (0)) is sufficiently small, guaranteeing that f |B1/2 n (0) is

generalised-C 1,α with uniform, quantitative, estimates.

There are two situations which in recent years have been shown to satisfy such an ε-regularity
property for suitable Q. These are:

    (a) Q = 2 and V corresponds to the graph of a Lipschitz 2-valued function. Indeed, in recent
        work with S. Becker-Kahn [BKMW25], the second and third authors show that such V sat-
        isfy an ε-regularity theorem near multiplicity 2 planes. In fact, this conclusion holds under
        a significantly weaker hypothesis – a structural condition on the region {X : ΘV (X) < 2}
        – in place of the assumption that the entire varifold is a 2-valued Lipschitz graph; see
        [BKMW25, Definition 0.1].

    (b) Q is arbitrary, V has codimension one and is stable on any orientable portion of the regular
        part, and V contains no classical singularities of density < Q. In the work [MW24], the
        second and third authors establish that such V satisfy an ε-regularity theorem near multi-
        plicity Q planes. This situation contains as a special case varifolds associated to currents
        which are area minimising mod p hypersurfaces.
              BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                         5

Remark 1.1. One might hope that in the future it is possible to prove such an ε-regularity
property in more general situations, such as when V corresponds to the graph of a Lipschitz Q-
valued function for arbitrary Q ∈ {2, 3, 4, . . . }. This is one of the reasons that the present paper is
phrased in this more general framework.

1.1. Main results. Throughout the paper we fix integers, n ≥ 2, k ≥ 1, and write P0 := {0}k ×Rn .
Recall that for a Lipschitz multi-valued function f : B1n (0) → AQ (Rk ), v(f ) denotes the varifold
associated to graph(f ), i.e. the varifold push-forward of B1n (0) under f . We also write G for the
Almgren metric on the set AQ (Rk ) of unordered Q-points in Rk , namely

                              Q            Q
                                                  !                Q
                                                                                          !1/2
                              X            X                       X
                          G         Jai K,   Jbi K :=        inf         |ai − bσ(i) |2
                                                            σ∈SQ
                              i=1        i=1                       i=1


where SQ denotes the set of bijections {1, . . . , Q} → {1, . . . , Q}. As shorthands, for a = Q
                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                   i=1 Jai K ∈
                                                      P              1/2
                                                         Q
AQ (Rk ) and v ∈ Rk we write |a| := G(a, QJ0K) ≡                    2      and a − v = Q
                                                                                      P
                                                         i=1 |ai |                       i=1 Jai − vK.

To state our main results we introduce the type of varifold class we consider. Let V denote a set
of stationary integral n-varifolds V in B2n+k (0) ⊂ Rn+k . We will assume that V is closed under
natural geometric operations and weak limits, namely:
      • For any V ∈ V, x0 ∈ B2n+k (0), ρ ∈ (0, 21 (2 − |x0 |)), and rotation Γ ∈ SO(n + k), we have
        (Γ ◦ ηx0 ,ρ )# V B2n+k (0) ∈ V.
      • If (Vj )j ⊂ V has lim supj→∞ ∥Vj ∥(B2n+k (0)) < ∞, then there is a subsequence (j ′ ) and
        V ∈ V (possibly V = 0) such that Vj ′ ⇀ V in B2n+k (0).
      • If V ∈ V is decomposable in the sense that V = V1 + V2 where V1 , V2 are integral n-varifolds
        with disjoint supports in B2n+k (0), then V1 , V2 ∈ V.
Here, ηx0 ,ρ (y) := (y − x0 )/ρ is the standard homothety Rn+k → Rn+k and ⇀ denotes convergence
as varifolds.
Fix an integer Q ∈ {2, 3, . . . }. The other assumption we make on V is that varifolds V ∈ V satisfy
an ε-regularity property near planes of multiplicity at most Q:

Definition 1.2. Let V and Q be as above. We say that V obeys the ε-regularity property up to
multiplicity Q if there exists ε = ε(V, Q) ∈ (0, 1) such that the following holds. If V ∈ V \ {0}
satisfies
      • (ωn 2n )−1 ∥V ∥(B2n+k (0)) < Q + 1/2;
      • ÊV < ε, where                     Z
                                 ÊV2 :=                 dist2 (x, P0 ) d∥V ∥(x),
                                           Rk ×B1n (0)


then, there is Q′ ∈ {1, 2, . . . , Q} and a Lipschitz Q′ -valued function u : B1/2
                                                                               n (0) → A ′ (Rk ) such
                                                                                        Q
that, setting V := V B15/8 (0), conditions (A), (B), and (C) below hold for some constants
               e
C = C(V, Q) ∈ (0, ∞) and α = α(V, Q) ∈ (0, 1):
   (A) Ve    (Rk × B1/2
                    n (0)) = v(u) and sup |u| + Lip(u) ≤ C Ê ;
                                                             V

   (B) u is generalised-C 1,α (see Definition 2.1);
6                    BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

    (C) Letting Cx denote the unique tangent cone to V at x ∈ spt∥Ve ∥ ∩ (Rk × B1/2     n (0)) (which is

        equal to the stationary union of N ∈ {2, 4, . . . , 2Q′ } half-planes, counted with multiplicity,
        which may form a union of (at most Q′ ) planes, including possibly a single plane occurring
        with multiplicity), we have:
         (1) for every x, y ∈ sing(Ve ) ∩ {ΘV = Q′ } ∩ (Rk × B1/2
                                                              n (0)),



                             distH (Cx ∩ B1n+k (0), Cy ∩ B1n+k (0)) ≤ C ÊV |x − y|α ;

         (2) for all x ∈ sing(Ve ) ∩ {ΘV = Q′ } ∩ (Rk × B1/2
                                                         n (0)),

                     Z
              −n−2
          r                              dist2 (y, x + Cx ) d∥Ve ∥(y) ≤ C ÊV2 r2α   for all r ∈ (0, 1/4).
                     Rk ×Brn (πP0 (x))



Remark 1.3. Note that from the Lipschitz bound in Definition 1.2(A), for all x ∈ spt∥Ve ∥ ∩ (Rk ×
 n (0)) each tangent cone C as in Definition 1.2(C) obeys
B1/2                       x


                                  distH (Cx ∩ B1n+k (0), P0 ∩ B1n+k (0)) ≤ C ÊV .

Notation: Given two varifolds V, W in B1n+k (0) we use the following shorthand notations:
      • distH (V ∩ B1n+k (0), W ∩ B1n+k (0)) ≡ distH (spt∥V ∥ ∩ B1n+k (0), spt∥W ∥ ∩ B1n+k (0));
      • For x ∈ Rn+k , dist(x, V ) ≡ dist(x, spt∥V ∥) and x + V ≡ (η−x,1 )# V .

Remark 1.4. One would expect an ε-regularity theorem holding near a multiplicity Q plane to
imply that any ε-regularity theorem also holds at multiplicity Q′ < Q planes, and so the need in the
above to work with all multiplicities ≤ Q would reduce to working with just multiplicity Q. Indeed,
this is certainly the case when the class V is determined by structural or variational assumptions,
as if V ∈ V was close to a multiplicity Q′ < Q plane P , one could consider V + (Q − Q′ )(P + z) for
a small z ∈ P ⊥ (for which P + z and V are disjoint) and this varifold would also lie in V and now
be close a multiplicity Q plane. However, it is not entirely clear how to deduce this abstractly from
a single regularity result near multiplicity Q planes. To phrase our results appropriately (and since
one expects that in order to verify an ε-regularity theorem near multiplicity Q planes, one needs
to have already verified one near planes of multiplicity < Q) we work with Definition 1.2 as stated.

Remark 1.5. When Q = 2 in Definition 1.2, as soon as one has the conclusion that Ve is represented
by a Lipschitz 2-valued graph, all the subsequent conclusions regarding generalised-C 1,α regularity
and the corresponding estimates follow from [BKMW25]. This is the basis for our application to
the class of Lipschitz 2-valued stationary graphs. It is perhaps reasonable to suspect that the ε-
regularity theorem in [BKMW25] generalises to all Q ∈ {2, 3, 4, . . . }, at which point not only does
the work become applicable to Lipschitz Q-valued stationary graphs, but Definition 1.2 simplifies,
only requiring the conclusion of being represented by a Lipschitz multi-valued graph.

Our main result is then the following. Here, we write BV for the branch set of a stationary integral
varifold V , i.e. the set of singular points where at least one tangent cone is a supported on a plane
(which necessarily has integer multiplicity > 1 by Allard’s regularity theorem).

Theorem A. Let V be a class of varifolds which is closed under natural geometric operations and
weak limits (see the discussion preceding Definition 1.2). Suppose also that V obeys the ε-regularity
               BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                       7

property up to multiplicity Q (see Definition 1.2). Then:

                                       dimH (BV ∩ {ΘV = Q}) ≤ n − 2.

In fact, by induction we have dimH (BV ∩ {ΘV ≤ Q}) ≤ n − 2, and so by standard stratification
results
                            dimH (sing(V ) ∩ {ΘV < Q + 1}) ≤ n − 1.

Remark 1.6. In fact, our proof of Theorem A provides a more precise description of the density
Q branch set by providing a certain stratification of it. Writing BVQ := BV ∩ {ΘV = Q}, we
will show that one can associate a (planar ) frequency value to each z ∈ BVQ , which is a number
NV (z) ∈ [1 + α, ∞), where α ∈ (0, 1) is as in Definition 1.2. We then have:
                                                           (1)         (1)
                                  BVQ ∩ {NV < 2} = S0 ∪ · · · ∪ Sn−2 ;

                                                           (2)         (2)
                                  BVQ ∩ {NV ≥ 2} = S0 ∪ · · · ∪ Sn−2 ;
                    (i)
where dimH (Sj ) ≤ j for each i ∈ {1, 2} and j ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n − 2}. When n = 2, we therefore have

                                                     (1)         (2)
                                              BVQ = S0 ∪ S0
                                 (2)                                                  (1)   (2)
and furthermore in this case S0 is a relatively closed subset of BVQ and both S0 , S0 are discrete.
This discreteness follows in an analogous manner to how for stratifications arising from a mono-
                                                                                  (1)   (2)
tonicity formula, the 0th -strata is discrete (as for us a limit point of either S0 or S0 would create a
non-collapsed 2-dimensional blow-up which has a 1-dimensional touching set, which is impossible).
Thus, when n = 2 the only possible branch points which are not isolated are those of planar fre-
quency ≥ 2 which are limit points of branch points of planar frequency < 2. In fact, for any ε > 0,
                                                           (2)          (2)
we can analogously stratify BVQ ∩ {NV ≥ 35 + ε} = S̃0 ∪ · · · ∪ S̃n−2 for arbitrary n, meaning that
when n = 2 the only situation in which we can have (distinct) density Q branch points (Zj )j ⊂ BVQ ,
Z ∈ BVQ with Zj → Z is when NV (Z) ≥ 2 and2 lim supj→∞ NV (Zj ) ≤ 35 , and so there must be a
genuine jump in the frequency value (in fact, one must even have NV (Z) ∈ {2, 3, 4, . . . }, else one
can get a contradiction by performing a suitable blow-up off the tangent plane at Z). Conjecturally
this should not happen when n = 2.

Theorem A is directly applicable in several situations. Indeed, consider the following two classes:

      • For L ∈ (0, ∞), write VL for the set of stationary integral n-varifolds in B2n+k (0) which are
        represented by the graph of a Lipschitz 2-valued function (or a single-valued function) over
        some n-dimensional subspace of Rn+k with Lipschitz constant ≤ L.

      • For Q ∈ {2, 3, . . . }, write SQ for the set of stationary integral n-varifolds in B2n+1 (0) which
        are stable on their regular part and have no classical singularities of density < Q.

These classes have been studied in [BKMW25, MW24], respectively, with ε-regularity theorems
established for both. As such, VL and SQ satisfy the assumptions of Theorem A (with Q = 2 in
the former case). We therefore have the following.


2See Remark 4.2 and Remark 4.14 for the explanation for why we get this improved upper bound on the frequency
value on the Zj .
8                  BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

Corollary 1.7. Let V be a stationary integral varifold in Rk × B1n (0) ⊂ Rn+k such that there is a
Lipschitz function u : B1n (0) → A2 (Rk ) for which V = v(u). Then

                                                dimH (BV ) ≤ n − 2.

Consequently, dimH (sing(V )) ≤ n − 1. Moreover, when n = 2 we have
                                                           (1)     (2)
                                                 BV = S0 ∪ S0
         (1)         (2)                                                                   (2)
where S0 and S0            are discrete sets as in Remark 1.6 and furthermore S0                 is a relatively closed
subset of BV .

Corollary 1.8. Let Q ∈ {2, 3, . . . } and V ∈ SQ . Then

                                        dimH (BV ∩ {ΘV = Q}) ≤ n − 2.

Consequently, dimH (sing(V ) ∩ {ΘV < Q + 1}) ≤ n − 1. Moreover, when n = 2 we have
                                                                   (1)     (2)
                                         BV ∩ {ΘV = Q} = S0 ∪ S0
         (1)         (2)                                                                   (2)
where S0 and S0 are discrete sets as in Remark 1.6, and furthermore S0                           is a relatively closed
subset of BV ∩ {ΘV < Q + 1}.

Remark 1.9. In Corollary 1.7, the claim on the full singular set follows directly from the branch
set dimension bound and general stratification theorems for singularities of stationary integral
varifolds. This part of Corollary 1.7 was recently established by Hirsch–Spolaor [HS24]. In the
special case of Corollary 1.7 where one knows that u is C 1,α rather than just Lipschitz, Corollary
1.7 was already known from the work of Simon and the third author [SW16]. The proof in [SW16]
uses purely PDE-theoretic methods (in particular without the need for an Almgren-type center
manifold construction, as, morally, the average of the two values is used as the center manifold)
and in fact subsequent work by the first and third authors [KW21] gives (again without employing
the Almgren center manifolds) that the branch set is countably (n − 2)-rectifiable, with unique
tangent maps at Hn−2 -a.e. branch point. Notice that the results in [SW16] are not otherwise
applicable in Corollary 1.7, since the ε-regularity theorem in [BKMW25] only provides generalised-
C 1,α regularity locally about branch points, not C 1,α regularity (although in codimension one it is
applicable, as then generalised-C 1,α regularity combined with stationarity implies C 1,α ).

Remark 1.10. For p ≥ 2 even, the class Sp/2 contains all varifolds associated to currents which are
area minimising hypersurfaces modulo p, and thus Corollary 1.8 includes as a special case the main
result established in [DLHM+ 22] (this is because all branch points have density p/2 in this case).
Since branch points in area minimising hypersurfaces mod p necessarily3 have planar frequency
≥ 2, it also shows that a two-dimensional surface in a smooth 3-manifold which is locally area

3This follows from the analysis in [DLHM+ 22]. It should be noted that this is a significant difference to the stable
hypersurface setting analysed in [MW24], as in the latter case it is possible for branch points to have planar frequency
< 2. The reason for this difference is precisely due to the fact that an area minimising hypersurface mod p must satisfy
a special orientation condition at classical singularities, namely that the unit conormals at the boundary must be
orientated in the same manner. This is a consequence of the minimising mod p assumption. Nonetheless, if one were
to assume such an orientation structure holds locally about a given branch point in a stable minimal hypersurface
in Sp/2 , one could similarly show that the planar frequency of the branch point must be ≥ 2. We refer the reader to
[MS26] for further discussion.
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                    9

minimising mod p has a discrete branch set (cf. Remark 1.6). We therefore have (this has also
independently been recently established in [SSS25]):

Corollary 1.11. A 2-dimensional area minimising surface mod p in a closed smooth 3-dimensional
Riemannian manifold has isolated branch points.

In the two-valued Lipschitz case as in Corollary 1.7, the work of Hirsch–Spolaor [HS24] establishes
the Hausdorff dimension bound n − 1 (on the entire singular set) by showing that the classical
Almgren program in its full extent – namely, the construction of sequences of center manifolds
and intervals of flattening for arbitrary branch points – can be adapted to this setting. In this
argument, as in the classical theory, all branch points are treated equally, since the argument
proceeds without the knowledge of the uniqueness of tangent cones (and suitable quantitative
estimates). Consequently, the argument does not seem to readily provide a mechanism for dealing
with possible “frequency 1” branch points, meaning that it only yields the conclusion that the
branch set has Hausdorff dimension ≤ n − 1. (This is not as issue in the classical setting of are-
minimisers, and the optimal n − 2 conclusion follows, as the linearisation process produces Dirichlet
energy minimisers.)

By contrast, in the present work, we use the regularity theory of [BKMW25] to establish the optimal
result, namely that the branch set has Hausdorff dimension ≤ n−2. Though arguably the regularity
theory in [BKMW25] is a “heavy tool,” it leads to the optimal results and also to considerable
simplifications is other ways. It allows us to introduce, to the present not-necessarily-minimising
setting, the planar frequency function developed by the first and third authors in their work on area
minimising currents [KW23a]. The planar frequency function allows one to treat branch points with
planar frequency < 2 directly (and even those with planar frequency > 2), namely by performing
a blow-up procedure relative to the (unique) tangent plane; no center manifolds are needed. For
the branch points of planar frequency ≥ 2, we are able to use a significantly simplified version of
Almgren’s program, building just one center manifold, avoiding the need for both changing center
manifolds and intervals of flattening – which are technically demanding foundational ingredients in
the classical theory. In situations where energy convergence is not readily available in the blow-up
procedure relative to this center manifold (cf. Remark 1.16), we use an elegant alternative argument
from [HS24] which treats blow-ups as multi-valued gradient Young measures.

Remark 1.12. In situations where one can show energy convergence when blowing-up relative
to the center manifold (as is the case when the varifold is that associated to an area minimising
current, or a current which is area minimising mod p, using a competitor argument), the language
of multi-valued gradient Young measures is not needed, and one can work with multi-valued W 1,2
functions instead (indeed, the former then reduces to the latter).

Combining Corollary 1.7 with the regularity theories in [BK17, BKMW25] as well as simple tan-
gent cone analysis, we immediately deduce the following structural result for stationary 2-valued
Lipschitz graphs.

Theorem B. There exists α = α(n, k) ∈ (0, 1) such that the following is true. Suppose that
u : B1n (0) → A2 (Rk ) is a Lipschitz 2-valued function with the property that the varifold V = v(u)
is stationary. Write U ⊂ B1n (0) for the (open) subset of B1n (0) consisting of the points locally about
which u is generalised-C 1,α . Then we have

                                      dimH (B1n (0) \ U ) ≤ n − 3.
10                  BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

In fact, we have the disjoint union

                                        spt∥V ∥ = R ∪ B ∪ C ∪ K

and that U = B1n (0) \ π(K ), where π : Rk × Rn → Rn is the orthogonal projection map and:
     (i)      • R is the set of regular points of V ;
              • B is the set of singular points of V where at least one tangent cone is a plane of
                multiplicity 2 (this is then the unique tangent cone and locally about the point V has a
                generalised-C 1,α structure by [BKMW25, Theorem A]);
              • C is the set of singular points of V where at least one tangent cone consists of either a
                sum of 2 distinct planes or 4 distinct half-planes with a common boundary (this is then
                the unique tangent cone and locally about the point V has a generalised-C 1,α structure
                by [BK17]);
              • K is a closed subset which consists of the singular points of V where no tangent cone
                can be written as the sum of 4 half-planes (including the possibility of two planes which
                may or may not coincide).
     (ii)     • dimH (B) ≤ n − 2;
              • dimH (C ) ≤ n − 1 (in fact, C is locally contained within an (n − 1)-dimensional C 1,α
                submanifold by [BK17]);
              • dimH (K ) ≤ n − 3.
            In particular, as sing(V ) = B ∪ C ∪ K , we have dimH (sing(V )) ≤ n − 1.

Proof. All the claims except the Hausdorff dimension on K follow from Theorem A and the regular-
ity theories established in [BK17, BKMW25]. To establish the Hausdorff dimension on K , we will
analyse the possible tangent cones to show that K must be a subset of the usual (n − 3)-stratum,
and thus the claimed dimension bound follows.
Indeed, suppose x ∈ sing(V ) and let C be a tangent cone at x. If dim(S(C)) ∈ {n − 1, n},
then one may deduce that C is the unique tangent cone and V has a GC 1,α structure locally
about x by applying the regularity theorems in [BK17, BKMW25]. Thus, x ̸∈ K . Now suppose
dim(S(C)) = n − 2. We claim that C must be a sum of two planes: once we have shown this one
may apply [BK17] to see that V is smoothly immersed locally about x, and thus x ̸∈ K , which
completes the proof.
Since V is a two-valued Lipschitz graph it follows that C is also represented by the graph of a
Lipschitz 2-valued function f : Rn → A2 (Rk ). By quotienting out by the spine of C, we may in
fact assume that C is a 2-dimensional cone with S(C) = {0}, so that f : R2 → A2 (Rk ). By the
homogeneity of C and Theorem A, we know that the branch set of C is contained within {0}, and
thus the only possible singularities of C away from {0} must be classical singularities. Each classical
singularity determines a ray of classical singularities in the domain of f : let N ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . } be
the number of such rays (we allow for N = 0 where there are no classical singularities). Note that
by a simple compactness argument on the link C ∩ S k+1 there must be only finitely many such
rays, so N < ∞. If N ≥ 1, denote the rays (through the origin) of the classical singularities by
ℓ1 , . . . , ℓN ⊂ R2 . Then R2 \ ∪N         N
                                  i=1 ℓi = ∪i=1 Wi , where in (suitable chosen) polar coordinates (r, θ) in
  2
R each Wi takes the form Wi = {r > 0, θi < θ < θi+1 } for some 0 = θ1 < · · · < θN +1 = 2π. On the
regions Wi × Rk , C is a 2-dimensional minimal cone which is the cone over two (smooth) geodesic
arcs in S k+1 , and thus C must be the sum of two planes here, which intersect only along θ = θi , θi+1 .
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                 11

But two distinct planes can only intersect along a subspace, and thus we need θi + π = θi+1 . But
since 0 ≤ θi ≤ 2π for all i, this forces N = 2 in this situation (with θ1 = π), and therefore in
general we must have N ∈ {0, 2}. But then in the case N = 0, we have that C coincides with
the sum of two planes, and so we are done. The only remaining case is when N = 2, in which
case C is the sum of 4 half-planes. But then this would force ΘC (0) = 2, and since the classical
singularities also have density 2, we would need that the classical singularities belong to the spine,
and so dim(S(C)) = 1, again giving the contradiction. Thus we need C to be the sum of two planes
only intersecting along a subspace of dimension n − 2, completing the proof.                        □

Remark 1.13. It might be possible to improve the bound on the Hausdorff dimension of K in
Theorem B (and hence of B1n (0) \ U ) to ≤ n − 4, which would be the best possible dimension
bound in arbitrary codimension due to the examples constructed by Lawson–Osserman [LO77]. In
codimension one, in fact one has K = ∅ (and hence has U = B1n (0)), see [Hie20, Theorem 5.2].

Combining Corollary 1.8 with the regularity theories in [MW24, Min24], we immediately deduce
the following structural result for V ∈ SQ :

Theorem C. Suppose V ∈ SQ . Then,

                    spt∥V ∥ ∩ {ΘV < Q + 1} = R≤Q ∪ B Q ∪ C Q ∪ C˜Q+1/2 ∪ K ,

where
     • R≤Q is the set of regular points of V with density in {1, 2, . . . , Q}, and thus about which
       spt∥V ∥ is a locally smooth submanifold;
     • BQ ≡ BV ∩ {ΘV = Q} is the set of density Q flat singular points of V ; by [MW24],
       locally about each point in B Q we have that V is a Q-valued generalised-C 1,α graph, and by
       Corollary 1.8 we know B Q has Hausdorff dimension ≤ n − 2;
     • C Q is the set of density Q classical singularities of V , and locally about each such point V
       is a smooth classical singularity (see [Kru14]);
     • C˜Q+1/2 is the set of points where one tangent cone to V is a classical cone of density Q+1/2;
       by [Min24], it follows that such a tangent cone is unique, and V is locally about each such
       point a (possibly branched) generalised-C 1,α perturbation of its tangent cone;
     • K is a relatively closed subset of {ΘV < Q + 1} which has dimension ≤ n − 2; in fact, K
       equals the (n − 2)-strata of V in {ΘV < Q + 1}.
In particular, dimH (sing(V ) ∩ {ΘV < Q + 1}) ≤ n − 1. Here, α = α(n, Q) ∈ (0, 1).

1.2. Overview of the proof. We begin with some technical preliminaries which follow from the
ε-regularity property in Definition 1.2. In particular, we establish suitable doubling conditions for
the energy of the Lipschitz multi-valued graphs representing V ∈ V about a branch point.
The first key step in the proof is to use these preliminaries to prove approximate monotonicity
of the planar frequency function, as introduced in [KW23a]. Indeed, we will show that at every
density Q branch point (which by hypothesis has a unique tangent cone and, again by hypothesis,
about which the structure of the varifold is given by the graph of a generalised-C 1,α function as in
Definition 1.2), the planar frequency function is approximately monotone at all scales. Thus, we
may associate a planar frequency value at every such point, which we then show takes values in
[1 + α, ∞). In particular, the planar frequency value always has a fixed gap above 1, thus ruling
12                 BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

out “frequency 1” branch points; we stress that this is stronger than in the corresponding situation
for area minimisers (cf. [KW23a]).
We then partition the set of (density Q) branch points into two (disjoint) pieces:
      • B ̸=2 , those where the planar frequency is valued in [1 + α, ∞) \ {2};
      • B 2 , those where the planar frequency is equal to 2.
We then show (as observed in [KW26a]) that B ̸=2 has Hausdorff dimension ≤ n − 2 using only the
planar frequency function. Indeed, we will show that the coarse blow-ups arising from a sequence
of vertical rescalings of a given V ∈ V about a branch point are always homogeneous, with degree
of homogeneity equal to the planar frequency value at the chosen point. At this stage, we can
then argue the dimension bound for B ̸=2 using either of the two usual “dimension reduction”
arguments. We opt for that of Almgren [Alm00] as opposed to Federer [Fed70], namely we stratify
B ̸=2 by the spine dimension of the coarse blow-ups and show that nearby points in B ̸=2 of “good”
planar frequency value must accumulate around the spine of the coarse blow-up. Due to the planar
frequency value lying in (1, ∞), the spine of these coarse blow-ups must be a subspace of dimension
≤ n − 2; we stress that having a frequency gap above 1 is what ensures that this spine dimension is
not n − 1. The desired dimension bound for this subset of the branch set then follows by standard
measure-theoretic arguments.
Let us elaborate on this last point that nearby points in B ̸=2 of “good” planar frequency value
must accumulate around the spine of the coarse blow-up, as it will illustrate why branch points of
planar frequency exactly 2 must be treated differently. The planar frequency function at a given
branch point measures the frequency of V relative to the tangent plane to V at the point (which
is unique, by Definition 1.2). However, the tangent plane may differ from point-to-point, and thus
branch points with different tangent planes have different “frequency functions”. The spine of the
coarse blow-up is however determined by the points of maximum frequency for a specific choice
of plane, and so it is not a priori clear that different branch points should accumulate along the
spine. However, we will show (similarly to [KW26a]), for B ̸=2 , that when we perform a coarse
blow-up, all these potentially different tangent planes at the relevant points in B ̸=2 coincide in the
coarse blow-up. As such, in the coarse blow-up the frequency functions at the limit points of these
branch points are measuring the frequency of the coarse blow-up with respect to the same plane,
and this is what forces the accumulation of these points around the spine of the coarse blow-up.
The reason this argument fails for points where the planar frequency is exactly 2 is simply because
one cannot in general guarantee that the (possibly different) tangent planes at different points of
planar frequency 2 coincide in the coarse blow-up limit4.
To show that the set B 2 has Hausdorff dimension ≤ n−2, we construct a center manifold analogously
to Almgren [Alm00] (see also [DLS16a]). This is needed, for instance, when the coarse blow-ups
collapse to a single (harmonic, homogeneous of degree 2) function with multiplicity Q. In fact, this
argument will also show that the set of branch points with planar frequency ≥ 2 has Hausdorff
dimension ≤ n − 2, although at this stage of the argument we only need to show this for the part
of the branch set where the planar frequency is exactly 2.
The reader who is familiar with Almgren’s center manifold construction will then note the benefit
of this approach: if one only wishes to study branch points where the decay to the (unique) tangent
4The reader may find it useful to think of this difference from the viewpoint of a Taylor expansion: measuring the
frequency with respect to the tangent plane is morally subtracting off the linear part of the Taylor expansion, leading
to the first possibly non-zero term being the quadratic term. Planar frequency 2 means this part does not vanish,
which is not a particularly stringent condition. Planar frequency > 2 forces this quadratic term to vanish, which is
more restrictive for, say, a harmonic function, and this is what allows us to show that the different tangent planes
coincide in this case.
              BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                          13

plane is at least quadratic, the center manifold is significantly simpler to use, as one may avoid
the need for a sequence of changing center manifolds and intervals of flattening. Consequently, one
only needs to build a single center manifold, which furthermore will touch the varifold at all nearby
branch points of the same density where the decay to the tangent plane is at least quadratic. (This
fact follows directly from the construction and was likely known to Almgren in the 1980’s, and is
noted in the work of S. Chang [Cha88].) As such, we only need this simpler construction. This
is one of the significant advantages of using the planar frequency function, as already observed in
[KW23a], namely by avoiding the need to use a center manifold at branch points with subquadratic
decay to the tangent plane (or with non-unique tangent cone); this is the situation requiring an
infinite sequence of center manifolds in the classical theory. Consequently, we will give an essentially
self-contained construction of the center manifold, including the proof of the almost monotonicity
of the frequency function relative to the center manifold, with certain refinements. A significant
portion of this will follow the relevant parts of the works [DLS16a, DLS16b], which in turn are a
technically streamlined version of Almgren’s original work.

Remark 1.14. One might wonder, given the Lipschitz multi-valued graph structure about our
branch points, whether it is possible to use a simpler approach than Almgren’s center manifold to
establish the dimension bound for B 2 . For instance, one might wonder if it is possible to perform a
blow-up relative to the average of the multi-valued graph instead of the center manifold. The issue
with this at the moment appears to be a lack of regularity for the average, since if one wishes to
show monotonicity of a frequency quantity relative to some submanifold, that submanifold needs to
be C 3 due to error terms involving derivatives of the mean curvature of the submanifold appearing
in the first variation computations (which arise from derivatives of the exponential map). Notice
that the center manifold is C 3,β , whilst we do not even know if the average-part of a stationary
Lipschitz multi-valued graph is C 2 in general5. Simply mollifying the average does not help either,
as one (ideally) wants the object to touch V at the desired branch points. If however one was in
a situation where it was known that the average did have this improved regularity, then it seems
reasonable that one could use the average as a replacement for the center manifold (for instance, if
the average-part was identically zero, this does work and indeed it reduces to the planar frequency).

Remark 1.15. One could alternatively attempt a method which falls between the planar fre-
quency and the center manifold, namely by trying to use a modification of the planar frequency
via measuring the frequency of V at a given branch point relative to some choice of, say, minimal
surface touching V at the branch point, and allowing the surface to vary from point-to-point. For
planar frequency, this choice of (minimal) surface is the tangent plane. However, it is unclear how
one might choose such surfaces in a manner which ensures both: (a) there is an approximately
monotone notion of frequency; and (b) the possibly different choices of surface at nearby points
collapse to a fixed one in the coarse blow-up limit (as was the case with planar frequency at points
of planar frequency ̸= 2); this latter condition is needed to know that in the blow-up the frequency
functions are the same. We stress that, for branch points of planar frequency ≥ 2, both of these
points are satisfied in the present work by taking the surface at different points to be a fixed one,
namely the single center manifold.

To aid the reader, we briefly mention that using a center manifold to control the dimension of
the branch points with planar frequency ≥ 2 is morally an argument using quantitative unique
continuation. Indeed, one can control the size of the touching set between two smooth minimal
surfaces using a frequency function. The geometric viewpoint of this is that one measures the

5It should be noted in the case of 2-valued C 1,α stationary graphs the work [SW16] provides a way around this
problem, utilising PDE-theoretic techniques to show that one can directly work with the average-free part of the
function.
14               BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

frequency of one surface relative to the other, and stratifies the touching set by looking at the
tangent maps, using elliptic estimates to linearise the problem (which in the setting of two minimal
graphs gives rise to homogeneous harmonic functions). When controlling the size of the branch
set of a given varifold, morally we wish to control the set of singular points where the surface is
touching itself (with “genuine” branch points being those where the “sheets” of the varifold are
indistinguishable, and so one cannot reduce the problem to the touching set of two minimal graphs).
The idea then is that, if one can find another (appropriate6) surface which touches the varifold along
some subset of the branch set, then one can control the size of that subset by controlling this part
of the touching set of two geometric objects as before. This is what the center manifold precisely
achieves, for the subset of the branch points where the planar frequency is ≥ 2. With this geometric
viewpoint, the argument is therefore a natural extension of typical quantitative unique continuation
arguments.
We also stress that, with this viewpoint, the main property one needs regarding the linearisation
procedure is that, when V is close to the manifold one is measuring frequency relative to (namely
the center manifold, or the tangent plane for planar frequency), it is close strongly in W 1,2 to
the linearised problem (after appropriate rescaling). This enables one to pass certain first variation
identities from V to the linearised problem (for example, to establish monotonicity of the frequency
function at the linearised level), which is all that is needed to conclude the argument. Other than
this, the precise form of the linearised problem is essentially irrelevant.

Remark 1.16. In more general situations, as in the present paper, this last point regarding strong
convergence in W 1,2 to the linearised problem (either relative to a plane or the center manifold)
is a non-trivial fact. In Appendix A we will see that under Definition 1.2 (as thus in the settings
                                                          1,2
of Corollary 1.7 and Corollary 1.8) we do have strong Wloc    (B1n (0)) convergence when linearising
relative to a plane (this uses the energy non-concentration estimate in [BKMW25, (B6)]). This
will be of great importance in our arguments, namely in establishing approximate monotonicity of
the planar frequency function.
For the linearisation procedure relative to the center manifold, in certain situations strong conver-
            1,2
gence in Wloc   can be directly verified (see Remark 1.12); for instance, in Almgren’s work on area
minimisers this is verified using a competitor argument.) In the present work, we use an argument
of Hirsch–Spolaor [HS24] which allows us to sidestep this issue by constructing blow-ups as multi-
valued gradient Young measures. These measures then form our blow-up class relative to the center
manifold, and we can similarly show that one may stratify branch points of planar frequency ≥ 2
by the spine dimension of these measures. This allows us to conclude the dimension bound again
by standard arguments.

Remark 1.17. As a final comment, we note that our approach is rather different to that used
by the third author and Simon in [SW16] when studying 2-valued C 1,α stationary graphs. As
mentioned, in [SW16] it was possible to avoid the use of Almgren center manifolds completely,
using a frequency function for the average-free part of the graph directly. Morally, if one can
‘subtract off’ the average and maintain all other analytic properties, such as an approximately
monotone frequency function and energy convergence to the linearised problem, then the above
geometric discussion is trivial, as one can simply look at the touching set between the average-free
part and a single plane (morally, the problem is then reduced to planar frequency). The reason why
this simplification was possible in [SW16] was that they were able to show that in fact the 2-valued
function was C 1,1/2 -regular, meaning that the coefficients of the corresponding (multi-valued) PDE
for the average-free part of the function are Lipschitz. This allows one to directly show that a
6The surface cannot be chosen completely arbitrarily due to the need for an approximately monotone frequency
function.
              BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                       15

suitable variant of Almgren’s frequency function, now for the average-free part, is approximately
monotone using ideas from the work of Garofalo–Lin [GL86, GL87]. For us, we do not expect in
general to have C 1,1/2 regularity of our multi-valued graphs and so we seemingly cannot argue like
this. Our present argument in particular avoids looking at multi-valued PDEs.

Organisation of paper: In Section 2 we give some preliminaries and results concerning the ε-
regularity property. In Section 3 we introduce the planar frequency function, show its approximate
monotonicity at all density Q branch points, and then use it to establish the dimension bound on
the set of branch points where the planar frequency is ̸= 2. In Section 4, we then construct a
single center manifold and use it to show that the set of branch points where the planar frequency
is exactly 2 (in fact, is ≥ 2) also has Hausdorff dimension ≤ n − 2, thus completing the proof of
Theorem A. In Appendix A we discuss the problem of energy convergence for coarse blow-ups,
and in Appendix B we develop the theory of multi-valued gradient Young measures introduced by
Hirsch–Spolaor [HS24].
Acknowledgements: This research was conducted during the period P.M. served as a Clay Re-
search Fellow. The authors would like to thank Sidney Stanbury for reading and providing valuable
feedback on a preliminary version of this paper.


                                            2. Preliminaries
Throughout we fix Q ∈ {2, 3, . . . } and a class V of stationary integral n-varifolds in B2n+k (0) which
satisfies:
      • V is closed under natural geometric operations and weak limits;
      • V obeys the ε-regularity property up to multiplicity Q (Definition 1.2).
In the present section, we will deduce consequences of the ε-regularity property holding up to
multiplicity Q. We refer the reader to [BKMW25, MW24] for further explanations of terminology
where needed. For simplicity, when constants depend on both V and Q, we simply write that they
depend on V.
For V ∈ V and P an n-dimensional subspace of Rn+k , we define the (one-sided ) L2 -height excess
of V relative to P by           Z
                                2
                              ÊV,P :=                        dist2 (x, P ) d∥V ∥(x)
                                          −1
                                         πP  (P ∩B1n+k (0))

where πP : Rn+k → P is the orthogonal projection onto P . We abbreviate ÊV,P0 by ÊV , where we
recall P0 := {0}k × Rn . We also define the L2 -tilt excess of V relative to P by:
                                     Z
                                   1
                            2
                          ÊV,P :=                       ∥πx − πP ∥2 d∥V ∥(x)
                                   2 πP−1 (P ∩B1n+k (0))

where here πx := πTx V whenever Tx V exists (which is ∥V ∥-a.e.), and for a linear map A : Rn+k →
Rn+k , ∥A∥2 := i,j A2ij denotes the Hilbert–Schmidt norm of A. We abbreviate ÊV,P0 by ÊV .
               P

Now consider a Q-valued Lipschitz function u : Ω → AQ (Rk ), where Ω ⊂ Rn is open. We write
u= Q
    P        α                                                   κ
                                                                              PQ      κ,α K, where we assume
       α=1 Ju K, and for each κ ∈ {1, . . . , k} we write u ≡ u · eκ =          α=1 Ju
      κ,1          κ,Q                                                            k
that u ≤ · · · ≤ u ; here {e1 , . . . , ek } denotes the standard basis for R . We stress that this does
not mean that u1 = (u1,1 , u2,1 , . . . , uk,1 ), for instance, as the orderings for the different coordinate
functions may be different.
16                BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

We now define what it means for such u to be generalised-C 1,α . We will define this inductively on
Q: when Q = 1, generalised-C 1,α simply means C 1,α in the usual, single-valued, sense. We write

                                   ΩQ
                                    u := {x ∈ Ω : u(x) = QJua (x)K}
                                                PQ                                           Q
for the Q-coincidence set of u; here ua := Q1      α
                                              α=1 u is the average-part of u. Notice that Ωu ⊂ Ω
is a relatively closed subset, and that for each x ∈ Ω \ ΩQ u , there is a radius ρ = ρ(x, u) > 0
such that u = ux1 + ux2 , where uxi : Bρ (x) → AQi (Rk ) are Lipschitz Qi -valued functions, where
Q1 , Q2 ∈ {1, . . . , Q − 1} and Q1 + Q2 = Q.

Definition 2.1. Fix α ∈ (0, 1). We say that a Lipschitz function u : Ω → AQ (Rk ) is generalised-
C 1,α in Ω, and belongs to GC 1,α (Ω), if the following holds:

     (1) For x ∈ Ω \ ΩQ                                             x x                        x
                      u , one may choose ρ = ρ(x, u) and functions u1 , u2 as above such that u1 and
          x
         u2 are generalised-C 1,α in Bρ (x).

     (2) To each x ∈ ΩQ                                  n       k
                      u , we can assign a function Ax : R → AQ (R ) with Ax (0) = J0K satisfying

                                lim |h|−1 G(u(x + h), ua (x) + Ax (h)) = 0
                                h→0


         such that we may write Ax = Q             α                                        α    n   k
                                          P
                                             α=1 JAx K, where for each α ∈ {1, . . . , Q}, Ax : R → R is a
         function of the following form: there is an (n − 1)-dimensional subspace S α ⊂ Rn such that
         if H1α , H2α are the (two, distinct) closed half-planes of Rn with boundary S α , then there are
         linear functions Lαi : Hiα → Rk with Lα1 |S α = Lα2 |S α such that Aαx (y) = Lαi (y) whenever
         y ∈ Hiα .

         In particular, the varifold Cx associated to the graph of Ax is a cone taking the form
                                                   Nx
                                                   X
                                            Cx =         Qix |H
                                                              ei|
                                                                x
                                                   i=1

                                       e x are distinct half-planes, and Qix ∈ {1, . . . , Q} are such that
         where Nx ∈ {1, 2, . . . , Q}, H
         PNx i                           i
                                                            i
           i=1 Qx = 2Q. Moreover, we assume that if Qx = Q for some i, then Cx = Q|P | for some
         plane P .

     (3) The map sending x 7→ Ax is α-Hölder continuous on the set ΩQ  u , where we define the metric
         on the image by d(Ax , Ay ) := supz∈B1n (0) G(Ax (z), Ay (z)).

Notice that this is a very crude Hölder-type assumption: we are just requiring some uniform Hölder
continuity of the tangent cones on the Q-coincidence set, and separately local α-Hölder regularity
of the tangent cones away from the Q-coincidence set. This is therefore less restrictive than the
definitions given in the special cases seen in [BKMW25, MW24]; however it suffices for our purposes.

Now we recall the (multiplicity Q) coarse blow-up class associated to V, denoted BQ  V , which consists
of all coarse blow-ups v ∈ W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk )) generated by V. These are functions generated by
performing a vertical (inhomogeneous) blow-up procedure of the sequence of multi-valued Lipschitz
approximations corresponding to a sequence (Vj )j ⊂ V which converge, as varifolds in Rk × B1n (0),
to the plane P0 with multiplicity Q. The reader can consult [BKMW25, Part 2] for the general
definition of a coarse blow-up, with a “coarse blow-up generated by V” being one in which the
sequence of varifolds all belong to V.
               BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                      17

Our first aim is to establish a modification of the ε-regularity property which guarantees closeness
in energy to a coarse blow-up when instead normalising the derivative of the function in Definition
1.2 by the tilt excess. This readily follows from the property given in Definition 1.2; we give the
argument for completeness. Here and throughout we will write BV for the set of Q-valued functions
given by sums of the form
                                               N
                                               XX  Qi
                                          v=          Jci viα K
                                                  i=1 α=1

where N ∈ {1, . . . , Q} and Q1 , . . . , QN ∈ {1, . . . , Q} are positive integers such that N
                                                                                                P
                                                                                                  i=1 Qi = Q,
ci ∈ [0, ∞) are constants (possibly zero) and vi = α=1 Jviα (x)K belong to BQ
                                                            PQi                           i
                                                                                        V   . As a shorthand,
                                    PN
we will write such a sum as v = i=1 ci vi , although the reader should note the (significant) abuse
of notation here, as when working with Dirac masses certainly 2JP K ̸= J2P K, however as for us the
total number of values will always be fixed this notation shouldn’t create any confusion.

Theorem 2.2. There exists ε = ε(V) ∈ (0, 1) such that the following holds. Suppose V ∈ V
satisfies
        • (ωn 2n )−1 ∥V ∥(B2n+k (0)) < Q + 1/2;
        • Q − 1/2 ≤ ωn−1 ∥V ∥(Rk × B1n (0)) ≤ Q + 1/2;
        • min{ÊV , ÊV } < ε.
                                                  n (0) → A (Rk ) such that if V
Then, there is a Lipschitz Q-valued function u : B1/2                          e =V               B15/8 (0),
                                                           Q
then
                      Ve (Rk × B1/2
                                  n
                                     (0)) = v(u)      and  Lip(u) ≤ C ÊV .
Furthermore, for any η > 0, there exists ε0 = ε0 (V, η) ∈ (0, 1) such that if additionally ε < ε0 , then
there is v ∈ BV such that        Z
                                               |Ê−1   2      2
                                                  V Du| − |Dv| < η.
                                       n (0)
                                      B1/2

Here, C = C(V) ∈ (0, ∞) and α = α(V) ∈ (0, 1).

Proof. Suppose that there is a sequence (Vj )j ⊂ V with Vj satisfying the assumptions of the theorem
with

(2.1)                                      min{ÊVj , ÊVj } → 0.

To prove the theorem, it suffices to show that all the conclusions hold for infinitely many j.
We claim that it suffices to assume instead of (2.1) that

(2.2)                                          ÊVj + ÊVj → 0.

Indeed, if from (2.1) we have ÊVj → 0, then one can use the reverse Poincaré inequality for
stationary integral varifolds to deduce that the tilt excess of Vj on any cylinder Rk × Bσn (0) must
→ 0, and therefore after a small rescaling we can assume (2.2). If instead (2.1) gives that ÊVj → 0,
then since the Vj have bounded supports (being varifolds in B2n+k (0)) we have that the Vj converge
as varifolds to at most Q planes parallel to P0 . If the limit is supported on more than one plane,
then since varifold convergence implies local convergence in Hausdorff distance, for any σ > 0
                                                                k
and all sufficiently large j we must have that spt∥Vj ∥ ∩ (B31/16           n (0)) has at least two
                                                                     (0) × B1−σ
18                     BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

connected components; the result then follows by induction, applying the ε-regularity property to
each component (each of which is close to a plane of multiplicity < Q)7; the Q = 1 case follows
from Allard’s regularity theorem and elliptic estimates for the minimal surface system. Hence, the
only remaining case is when the limit is a single plane (with multiplicity Q), and hence the L2
height excess on any Rk × Bσn (0), σ ∈ (0, 1), must → 0 as j → ∞. Again, by rescaling Vj by a small
amount and a vertical translation, we can then reduce to (2.2).
We therefore have Vj ⇀ Q|P0 | as varifolds in Rk ×B1n (0). The ε-regularity property from Definition
                                                         n (0) → A (Rk ) with
1.2 then establishes the existence of the function uj : B3/4        Q


                           Vj     (Rk × B3/4
                                         n
                                             (0)) = v(uj )              and        Lip(uj ) ≤ C ÊVj .

We now wish to control Du by ÊV rather than ÊV . For this, notice that the Poincaré inequality
for multi-valued functions (see [DLS11, Proposition 2.12]) gives
                               Z                       Z
(2.3)                                 G(uj , ξj )2 ≤ C        |Duj |2
                                            n (0)
                                           B3/4                            n (0)
                                                                          B3/4


for some ξRj ∈ AQ (Rk ). Notice   that we can without loss of generality assume that (ξj )a = 0, since
|ξj |2 ≤ C B n (0) |uj |2 + C B n (0) |Duj |2 and the right-hand side of this inequality → 0 as j → ∞,
                             R
             3/4               3/4

and so translating Vj by (ξj )a the resulting varifolds still converge to P0 . Write ξj = Q           α
                                                                                             P
                                                                                                α=1 Jξj K
where ξjα ∈ Rk , and define π j := ∪Q       α         α      α      n
                                       α=1 πj where πj := {ξj } × R . Notice that (2.3) gives
        Z                                          Z
                            2
                       dist (x, π j ) d∥Vj ∥ +                     dist2 (x, Vj ) d∥π j ∥
               n (0)
          Rk ×B3/4                                        n (0)
                                                     Rk ×B3/4
                                                                                    Z
(2.4)                                                                         ≤C                    ∥πx − πP0 ∥2 d∥Vj ∥.
                                                                                           n (0)
                                                                                      Rk ×B3/4


We now claim that for η = η(V) ∈ (0, 1/8) sufficiently small, if
      Z                               Z                                 Z
                  2                              2                    2
(2.5)         dist (x, π j ) d∥Vj ∥ +       dist (x, Vj ) d∥π j ∥ ≤ η                                     dist2 (x, P0 ) d∥Vj ∥,
                 n
            Rk ×B3/4                                    n
                                                   Rk ×B3/4                                         n
                                                                                               Rk ×B3/4


then spt∥Vj ∥∩(Rk ×B5/8  n (0)) has two connected components; at this point, we can argue inductively

as before to conclude the theorem. Indeed, this can be seen by a contradiction argument via
performing a coarse blow-up and using the uniform convergence to the coarse blow-up (which
would be a union of at least 2 distinct planes, using that ξj is average-free); notice that (2.5)
implies ξj ̸= 0, else π j = P0 .8 Thus, we have established the theorem under (2.5).
7Notice that, if a component V
                                  j,i of Vj converges to a plane Pi parallel to P0 , after translating we may assume
Pi = {0}k × Rn , and we construct coarse blow-ups by rescaling by ÊVj,i ,Pi , with the correct scaling for the gradient
being determined by a limit of ÊVj,i ,Pi /ÊVj,i ≡ ÊVj,i ,Pi /ÊVj,i ,Pi → ci ∈ [0, ∞). In particular, by induction we would
have Ê−1                       2   n
       V Duj,i → Dvi in L (B1/2 (0)) for some vi in the blow-up class. The limit we are then interested in is
     PNj,i
v = i=1 c̃i vi , where c̃i = limj→∞ ÊVj,i /ÊVj ∈ [0, 1]. This is why we must allow the possibility for distinct, and
possibly zero, coefficients weighting each individual coarse blow-up in the definition of BV .
8One can alternatively argue directly that there must be two components under (2.5), using the Lipschitz regularity of
uj and simple measure estimates to show that one has spt∥Vj ∥∩(Rk ×B5/8          n
                                                                                    (0))∩{dist(·, π j ) ≥ 14 minξα ,ξβ distinct |ξ α −
 β
ξ |} = ∅ for all j sufficiently large and for η sufficiently small. The main point here is that if this latter set
were not empty, then by the Lipschitz regularity of uj there would be a sufficiently large ball where Vj remains
                BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                                        19

We are therefore left with the case when (2.5) fails. In which case, combining with (2.4) we have
                  Z                                         Z
                              dist2 (x, P0 ) d∥Vj ∥ ≤ Cη −2          ∥πx − πP0 ∥2 .
                              n (0)
                         Rk ×B3/4                                              n (0)
                                                                          Rk ×B3/4


Hence, if we now apply our ε-regularity property to (η0,3/4 )# Vj in place of Vj and use a simple
covering argument we get
                                             Z                                     !1/2
                                                                 2
                  Lip(uj |B1/2
                           n (0) ) ≤ C                      dist (x, P0 ) d∥V ∥
                                                    n (0)
                                               Rk ×B3/4

                                                  Z                                       !1/2
                                     ≤ Cη −1                     ∥πx − πP0 ∥2 d∥Vj ∥             ≤ Cη −1 ÊV
                                                        n (0)
                                                   Rk ×B3/4


The second claim follows similarly, now using Theorem A.1 in order to deducing the energy con-
vergence.                                                                                   □

Remark 2.3. Under the assumptions of Theorem 2.2, if one additionally assumes that ΘV (0) ≥ Q
then one can directly verify the Poincaré-style inequality
                  Z                                    Z
                                   2
                               dist (x, P0 ) d∥V ∥ ≤ C      ∥πx − πP0 ∥2 d∥V ∥
                              n (0)
                         Rk ×Bσ/2                                    Rk ×Bσn (0)


for any given σ ∈ (0, 1), providing ε is small depending on σ as well. This follows from the
first variation formula and Almgren’s (weak) Lipschitz approximation with error terms controlled
by the tilt excess (arguing analogously to that seen in [Wic14, (7.4)]). Thus in this situation,
after rescaling, one can assume that the height excess and tilt excess on different cylinders are
comparable.

We now recall some of the main properties concerning coarse blow-ups v ∈ BV . These are direct
consequences of the strong convergence in W 1,2 to the coarse blow-up guaranteed in Definition 1.2
(cf. Appendix A) and the stationarity of the varifolds involved.

Theorem 2.4. If v ∈ BV has v ̸≡ 0 in B1n (0), then for any y ∈ B1n (0) and ρ ∈ (0, 1 − |y|) we have
that v ̸≡ 0 on any ball Bρn (y) ⊂ B1n (0), and that the frequency function

                                                        ρ2−n Bρ (y) |Dv|2
                                                            R
                                             Nv,y (ρ) := 1−n R            2
                                                         ρ     ∂Bρ (y) |v|

is well-defined and is a monotonically non-decreasing function of ρ. In particular, the frequency
Nv (y) := limρ↓0 Nv,y (ρ) ∈ [0, ∞) exists for each y ∈ B1n (0) and is an upper semi-continuous function
of y.
Furthermore, all of these conclusions also hold for vf , the average-free part of v, in place of v.

From this we deduce some elementary consequences for v ∈ BV and the Q-valued functions pro-
vided by Definition 1.2. These will be used when proving approximate monotonicity of the planar

≥ 81 minξα ,ξβ distinct |ξ α − ξ β | from each plane in π j , which gives minξα ,ξβ distinct |ξ α − ξ β | ≤ Cη ÊVj , which when
combined with (2.5) gives a contradiction via the triangle inequality.
20                      BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

frequency function in Section 3. Analogous estimates will also be needed when proving the mono-
tonicity of the frequency function relative to a center manifold.

Lemma 2.5. Fix c ∈ (0, ∞). Then there exists β = β(V, c) ∈ (0, 1) such that the following is true.
If v ∈ BV obeys               Z                  Z
                                                                  |Dv|2 ≥ c2                  |Dv|2
                                                       Bρ/2 (z)                      Bρ (z)

for some Bρ (z) ⊂ B3/4 (0), then for any ζ ∈ Bρ/5 (z) we have
                                                   Z                             Z
                                                                       2
                                                                  |Dv| ≥ β   2
                                                                                              |Dv|2 .
                                                     Bρ/20 (ζ)                       Bρ (z)


Proof. We argue by contradiction. Suppose instead that for some fixed c ∈ (0, ∞) we have functions
vj ∈ BV , balls Bρj (zj ) ⊂ B3/4 (0), and points ζj ∈ Bρj /5 (zj ) such that
             Z                                 Z                                         Z                              Z
                                   2       2                       2                                             1 2
(2.6)                         |Dvj | ≥ c                      |Dvj |       yet                          |Dvj | < 2                  |Dvj |2
               Bρj /2 (zj )                       Bρj (zj )                                Bρ /20 (ζj )         j       Bρj (zj )
                                                                                               j


                                                                              2                                            9
                                                          R
for all j. In particular, we must have                        Bρj (zj ) |Dvj | > 0 for all j. First, notice that by arguing as
in [BKMW25, (B3I)] and using Theorem 2.2 with Appendix A (which gives the strong convergence
in L2 of the derivative along the blow-up sequence when normalising by the tilt excess) we have
                                                                  −1/2
that there is ṽj ∈ BV for which Dṽj (x) = ρ2−n                 2
                                                 R
                                             j    Bρ (zj ) |Dvj |        ρj Dvj (zj + ρj x). Combining
                                                                                 j
this with (2.6) we have
                       Z                                                             Z
                                                                                                                   1
(2.7)                                          |Dṽj |2 ≥ c2           yet                            |Dṽj |2 <
                                   B1/2 (0)                                            B1/20 (ζ̃j )                j2

where ζ̃j := ρ−1
              j (ζj −zj ) ∈ B1/5 (0). Now applying the compactness property for BV (cf. [BKMW25,
(B3IV)]) we may pass to a subsequence for which Dṽj → Dṽ for some ṽ ∈ BV , where the conver-
gence (again, due to Theorem 2.2 and Appendix A) is now strongly in L2loc (B1 (0)). In particular,
taking j → ∞ in (2.7) gives
                          Z                              Z
                                       2   2
                                  |Dṽ| ≥ c     and             |Dṽ|2 = 0
                                       B1/2 (0)                                          B1/40 (ζ̃)


where we have also passed to a subsequence so that ζ̃j → ζ̃ ∈ B 1/5 (0); in particular, |Dṽ| = 0 on
B1/40 (ζ̃). But as ṽ ∈ BV has a monotone frequency function by Theorem 2.4, this would imply that
|Dṽ| = 0 on B1 (0), contradicting B (0) |Dṽ|2 ≥ c2 . This contradiction completes the proof.
                                   R
                                                                                                   □
                                                        1/2



Remark: The restriction on the ball Bρ (z) in Lemma 2.5 is simply due to the fact that we do not
know whether we have energy convergence on the whole of B1 (0) along the blow-up sequence, but
only locally on B1 (0).
We now “de-linearise” Lemma 2.5, giving a version for the varifold itself.

9Recalling the definition of B , this means arguing as in [BKMW25, (B3I)] for each v
                              V                                                     j,i in the decomposition
       P
vj =    i cj,i vj,i .
               BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                 21

Lemma 2.6. Fix c ∈ (0, ∞), and let ε∗ = ε∗ (V) be the constant from Theorem 2.2. Then, there
exists ε = ε(V, c) ∈ (0, ε∗ ) and β = β(V, c) ∈ (0, 1) such that the following holds. Suppose V ∈ V
satisfies

        • Q − 1/2 ≤ ωn−1 ∥V ∥(Rk × B1n (0)) < Q + 1/2;

        • ÊV < ε.
               n (0) → A (Rk ) is the function given by Theorem 2.2, and if for some B (ξ) ⊂
Then, if u : B1/2       Q                                                             8σ
B7/16 (0) we have
                                        Z                          Z
(2.8)                                                  2
                                                   |Du| ≥ c    2
                                                                                 |Du|2 ,
                                         Bσ (ξ)                        B8σ (ξ)

then for any ζ ∈ B2σ/5 (ξ) we have
                                    Z                                  Z
                                                           2       2
                                                   |Du| ≥ β                         |Du|2 .
                                     Bσ/10 (ζ)                          B8σ (ξ)




Proof. Of course, we may assume that |Du| ̸≡ 0 on B8σ (ξ), else the result is trivial. Then, similarly
to as in the proof of Lemma 2.5, we may use [BKMW25, (B3I)] and Theorem 2.2 to translate and
rescale to assume that 8σ = 1 and furthermore that Ê−1                               2
                                                            V Du is close to Dv in L (B1/2 (0)) for some
v ∈ BV (the important point here is that the normalising factor ÊV is defined on the cylinder
with the same radius as the ball in the right-hand side of (2.8), and so can be assumed to satisfy
(1 − δ)∥Du∥2L2 (B1 (0)) ≤ Ê2V ≤ (1 + δ)∥Du∥2L2 (B1 (0)) for a suitable choice of δ > 0, say δ = 1/2).

Thus, we may reduce to the case where we are assuming
                                Z                  Z
                                            2
                                       |Du| ≥ c  2
                                                      |Du|2
                                            B1/8 (0)                       B1 (0)

and, for a fixed η ∈ (0, 1) (to be determined depending on V and c), for ε = ε(V, c) > 0 sufficiently
small we have                       Z
                                                             2
                                            Ê−1
                                              V  |Du| − |Dv|   ≤η
                                            B1/4 (0)

for some v ∈ BV . Thus, the triangle inequality gives
                          Z                 Z
                                       2
                                  |Dv| ≤ 2           Ê−2    2
                                                       V |Du| + 2η ≤ 8,
                              B1/4 (0)                 B1/4 (0)

where the last inequality here is provided ε is sufficiently small. We also have

                                                            c2 −2                      c2
             Z                   Z                                Z
                            2  1            −2    2
                        |Dv| ≥            ÊV |Du| − η ≥ ÊV               |Du|2 − η ≥
               B1/8 (0)        2 B1/8 (0)                   2       B1 (0)             4

provided η = η(V, c) ∈ (0, 1) is sufficiently small. Combining the above two inequalities we get

                                                               c2
                                    Z                               Z
                                                   |Dv|2 ≥                          |Dv|2 .
                                        B1/8 (0)               32       B1/4 (0)
22              BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

We may therefore apply Lemma 2.5 to deduce the existence of β = β(V, c) > 0 such that for any
ζ ∈ B1/20 (0),              Z                  Z
                                              |Dv|2 ≥ β 2                   |Dv|2 .
                                  B1/80 (ζ)                      B1/4 (0)

But then we have
                       Z                       Z
                                     2   1
                                  |Du| ≥                      Ê2V |Dv|2 − η Ê2V
                        B1/80 (ζ)        2        B1/80 (ζ)

                                             β2
                                                  Z
                                         ≥                    Ê2V |Dv|2 − η Ê2V
                                             2     B1/4 (0)

                                             β2                         β2
                                                Z                         
                                                                    2
                                         ≥                |Du| − η 1 +       Ê2V
                                           4 B1/4 (0)                   2
                                           β 2 c2                       β2
                                                  Z                       
                                                               2
                                         ≥                 |Du| − η 1 +      Ê2V
                                             4     B1 (0)                2
                                             2
                                           β c  2 Z
                                         ≥                 |Du|2
                                             8     B1 (0)

provided η = η(V, c) > 0 is sufficiently small. Applying the inverse homothety to that from the
start of the proof completes the argument.                                                   □



                                      3. Planar Frequency
In this section we introduce the planar frequency function, originally used by the first and third
authors in their work on analysing the branch set of an area minimising current [KW23a]. In
this section we show its approximate monotonicity at density Q branch points of varifolds V ∈ V,
and then subsequently use it to show that the set of (density Q) branch points where the planar
frequency value is not equal to 2 has Hausdorff dimension ≤ n − 2.

Throughout, we fix V ∈ V and suppose Z ∈ spt∥V ∥ is such that V has one tangent cone at Z
being a plane P with multiplicity Q, and furthermore there is no δ > 0 for which V Bδn+k (Z) =
Q|P + Z| Bδn+k (Z) (e.g. Z ∈ sing(V )). Such assumptions hold, for instance, about a density Q
branch point of V . By Definition 1.2, we know that this tangent cone is unique and, by translating
and rotating, we may without loss of generality assume that Z = 0 and P = P0 ≡ {0}k × Rn .
Moreover, we know that there is some scale ρ > 0 for which the conclusions of Definition 1.2
apply to V in Bρ (0); by considering instead (η0,ρ )# V in place of V , we may without loss of
generality assume that ρ = 1. In particular, we may assume that there is a generalised-C 1,α function
      n (0) → A (Rk ) with u(0) = QJ0K, Du(0) = QJ0K, which further obeys the estimates and
u : B1/2         Q
conclusions in Definition 1.2 and Theorem 2.2 (recall also Remark 2.3, which gives comparability of
the height and tilt excess under the present assumptions; we also replace V with Ve as in Theorem
2.2). Thus, from the decay rate of the tilt excess as well as the Lipschitz bound, we have the
pointwise bound

(3.1)                       |Du(x)| ≤ C ÊV rα                              n
                                                              for a.e. x ∈ B1/2 (0),

where r = |x|. For notational simplicity, we will write L = C ÊV for this Lipschitz constant. We
also remark that one can assume that (cf. (3.6)), for x where Du(x) is defined, if S is the tangent
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                   23

space to V at the point (uα (x), x) then we have

                              1                            2
(3.2)                           ∥πS − πP0 ∥2 ≤ |Duα (x)|2 ≤ ∥πS − πP0 ∥2 .
                              3                            3

In particular, we can arrange so that 12 ÊV ≤ ∥Du∥L2 (B1 (0)) ≤ 2ÊV .

3.1. Approximate monotonicity of the planar frequency function. Let φ : [0, ∞) → R be
the Lipschitz function defined by
                                        
                                        1
                                               if s ∈ [0, 1/2);
                                 φ(s) := 2 − 2s if s ∈ [1/2, 1);
                                        
                                         0      if s ∈ [1, ∞).
                                        

Technically, in our arguments we will need to take a smooth approximation of φ and then take a
limit (cf. [KW23a, Proof of Lemma 4.5]). For ease of presentation, we shall not comment further
on this detail.
For ρ ∈ (0, 1/2) we define:
                                       Z
                                                             1
                      H(ρ) := −ρ1−n     dist2 (X, P0 )|∇S r|2 φ′ (r/ρ) dV (X, S),
                                                             r
                                          Z
                                    1 2−n
                           D(ρ) := ρ         ∥πS − πP0 ∥2 φ(r/ρ) dV (X, S).
                                    2
Here, r = |x| and X = (y, x) ∈ Rk × Rn ∼    = Rn+k , so that dist(X, P0 ) ≡ |y|. These are the same
intrinsic expressions as defined in [KW23a]. We then define the planar frequency function by

                                                       D(ρ)
                                            N (ρ) :=        .
                                                       H(ρ)

Note that this is well-defined. Indeed, if it were not then necessarily H(ρ) = 0, i.e. |u| ≡ 0 on
Bρ (0) \ B ρ/2 (0). But now take ζ ∈ Cc1 (B1n (0); R) with ζ ≡ 1 on B3ρ/4 (0) and ζ ≡ 0 outside
Bρ (0). Consider its vertical extension ζ̃(y, x) := ζ(x) for (y, x) ∈ Rk × B1n (0), and take any ζ̄ ∈
Cc1 (Rk × B1n (0)) which agrees with ζ̃ on a neighbourhood of spt∥V ∥. Then, for any κ ∈ {1, . . . , k},
by taking the function xκ ζ̄eκ in the first variation formula for V , where eκ is the unit vector in the
xκ -direction, we get         Z                         Z
                                 ζ̄|∇V xκ |2 d∥V ∥ = − xκ ∇V xκ · ∇V ζ̄.

By choice of ζ, the integrand on the right-hand side is supported on Rk ×(Bρ (0)\B 3ρ/4 (0))∩spt∥V ∥,
which is where we know xκ ≡ 0 (as |u| ≡ 0 here). Thus, we have for each κ ∈ {1, . . . , k},
                                        Z
                                           ζ̄|∇V xκ |2 d∥V ∥ = 0

which in turn implies that |Du| ≡ 0 on B3ρ/4 (0), i.e. u is constant in B3ρ/4 (0). But as |u| ≡ 0 on
B3ρ/4 (0) \ B ρ/2 (0), this gives that |u| ≡ 0 on Bρ (0). But then this means that V (Rk × Bρn (0)) ≡
Q|Bρn (0)|, giving a contradiction. Thus, N (ρ) is well-defined for each ρ ∈ (0, 1/2).
Notation: We write HV,P,Z (ρ), DV,P,Z (ρ), and NV,P,Z (ρ) for the above (intrinsic) quantities centred
at a point Z and relative to a plane P passing through Z. These are exactly the above expressions
24              BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

when applied to the varifold (Γ ◦ τZ )# V , where τZ (X) := X − Z and Γ is any rotation of Rn+k
sending P − Z to P0 .

Remark 3.1. When the codimension is 1, the above expressions for H(ρ) and D(ρ) take a much
simpler looking form in terms of the function u. This is due to the normal space to the graph of u
being 1-dimensional. Indeed, by direct computation (similar to those done below) one may check
that when k = 1:
                                                                1 + |Dθ u|2
                                         Z
                          H(ρ) = −ρ  1−n
                                            |u|2 r−1 φ′ (r/ρ) · p           ,
                                                                  1 + |Du|2
                                         Z
                                                                   1
                            D(ρ) = ρ2−n |Du|2 φ(r/ρ) · p                  .
                                                                1 + |Du|2
                                                                        x
Here, |Dθ u|2 = |Du|2 − |Dr u|2 is a shorthand notation, where Dr u := |x| · Du. Here, we are also
implicitly summing over the Q-values of u meaning, for example, that technically we have
                                    Q           Z
                                    X                                    1
                         D(ρ) =           2−n
                                          ρ         |Duα |2 φ(r/ρ) · p            .
                                    α=1                               1 + |Duα |2

This makes very explicit the comparison between the intrinsic expressions for H(ρ) and D(ρ)
to those defined for a Dirichlet-minimising function. Here, we have additional factors coming
from the non-linear nature of the minimal surface equation. These additional factors (and their
counterparts in higher codimension) effectively allow us to deal with error terms which appear in
the first variation formula when establishing the approximate monotonicity of the planar frequency
function. Notice that each of these additional factors is comparable to 1, since

            1 + |Dθ u|2
                                                                                     
                               1     p
                                             2
                                                                 1               1
           p            ∈ √         , 1+L           and     p            ∈ √          ,1 .
              1 + |Du|2      1 + L2                           1 + |Du|2        1 + L2
                                                                               1,2
In particular, as L = C ÊV , we see that as we have strong convergence in Wloc    (B1 ) along coarse
blow-up sequences, these expressions will converge to the usual ones at the blow-up level (this will
be important later). The same is also true in codimension > 1, as in general:
                                    Q X
                                  Z X n p
                                                          xi xj
                H(ρ) = −ρ1−n             G(Duα )Gij (Duα ) 2 |uα |2 r−1 φ′ (r/ρ),
                                                           r
                                    α=1 i,j=1

                                    Q X
                                  Z X n p
                            2−n
                 D(ρ) = ρ                G(Duα )Gij (Duα )Di uα · Dj uα φ(r/ρ),
                                    α=1 i,j=1

where here Gij (Duα ) = δij + Di uα · Dj uα and, representing (Gij (Duα ))ij as an n × n matrix,
(Gij (Duα ))ij denotes the inverse matrix of (Gij (Duα ))ij and G(Duα ) denotes the determinant of
(Gij (Duα ))ij . One can also use the first variation formula for V to similarly write down general
inner and outer variational formulas for u, certain special cases of which we will use below.

We now show that the planar frequency function is approximately monotone. We begin by com-
puting the derivatives of H(ρ) and D(ρ): these computations mirror those in [KW23a], except
they are in fact simpler due to V being graphical on the region of interest, along with the estimate
provided in (3.1) (this allows us to simplify the arguments needed to control certain error terms
which arise).
              BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                 25

We first compute the form of some key expressions at a point (uα (x), x) in the graph of u with
tangent space S (which is a plane a.e.). Recall that X = (y, x) ∈ Rk × Rn and r = |x|. Firstly, one
may find an orthonormal basis {τ1 , . . . , τk } for S ⊥ which takes the form
                                             i−1                n+k
                          (ei , −Duα,i )     X                  X
                     τi = p                +     O(|Du|2 )ej +       O(|Du|3 )ej
                                   α,i
                            1 + |Du |    2
                                             j=1               j=k+1

(each coefficient in the two sums may depend on the summand, but are of the order written). For
notational simplicity, we suppress the index α and just write u(x). From this it follows that:

(3.3)                              πP ⊥ (∇S r) = Dr u + O(|Du|3 );
                                     0

(3.4)                                    |∇S r|2 = 1 − |Dr u|2 + O(|Du|4 );
                                           ⊥
(3.5)                                |∇S r|2 = |Dr u|2 + O(|Du|4 );
                              1
(3.6)                           ∥πS − πP0 ∥2 = |Du|2 + O(|Du|4 ).
                              2


Step 1: Derivative of H. The derivative of H is (recall |y| = dist(X, P0 )):
                       Z                                      Z
                               S 21 ′
    ′
   H (ρ) = (n − 1)ρ −n      2
                         |y| |∇ r| φ (r/ρ) dV (X, S) + ρ −1−n
                                                                |y|2 |∇S r|2 φ′′ (r/ρ) dV (X, S).
                                  r
                             n+k
Now take ζ = |y|2 φ′ (r/ρ)∇R r in the first variation formula for V . We get:
      Z
                                        1
         2(y, 0) · πP ⊥ (∇S r)φ′ (r/ρ) + |y|2 |∇S r|2 φ′′ (r/ρ)
                      0                 ρ
                                                                         
                                    2 −1 ′             1        2     S 2
                              + |y| r φ (r/ρ) n − ∥πS − πP0 ∥ − |∇ r| dV (X, S) = 0.
                                                       2

Multiplying this by ρ−n and rearranging, using the above expression for H ′ (ρ), we see
                   Z
     ′
  H (ρ) = −2ρ   −n
                     (y, 0) · πP ⊥ (∇S r)φ′ (r/ρ) dV (X, S)
                                0
                                         Z                                         
                                      −n        2 −1 ′        S⊥ 2  1             2
                                   −ρ        |y| r φ (r/ρ) n|∇ r| − ∥πS − πP0 ∥ dV (X, S) .
                                                                    2
                                   |                           {z                       }
                                                                  =: error1

So, we have
                                     Z
(3.7)              H ′ (ρ) = −2ρ−n       (y, 0) · πP ⊥ (∇S r)φ′ (r/ρ) dV (X, S) + error1
                                                   0



where error1 is as above. Using (3.5) and (3.6) along with (3.1), we see that we can control this
error term by

(3.8)          |error1 | ≤ 2 · Q(n + 1) · L2 ρ2α · ρ−1 · H(ρ) = 2Q(n + 1)L2 ρ2α−1 H(ρ),

where the factor of 2 at the front is coming from the O(|Du|4 ) terms in (3.5), (3.6) and the error
from 1 in (3.4).
26               BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

Step 2: Alternative expression for D. Now let us turn to D(ρ). If one takes ζ = φ(r/ρ)(y, 0)
in the first variation formula for V , we get
                  Z
                     1                      1
                       ∥πS − πP0 ∥2 φ(r/ρ) + φ′ (r/ρ)(y, 0) · πP ⊥ (∇S r) dV (X, S) = 0.
                     2                      ρ                   0



Multiplying by ρ2−n we see this immediately gives
                                      Z
(3.9)                 D(ρ) = −ρ   1−n
                                        (y, 0) · πP ⊥ (∇S r)φ′ (r/ρ) dV (X, S).
                                                    0



Step 3: Derivative of D. Next, note that we have (from the original expression for D(ρ)):

               2 − n 1−n
                         Z                                  Z
                                                       1 −n
        ′
(3.10) D (ρ) =      ρ                2
                           ∥πS −πP0 ∥ φ(r/ρ) dV (X, S)− ρ     ∥πS −πP0 ∥2 rφ′ (r/ρ) dV (X, S).
                 2                                     2

Now if we take ζ = φ(r/ρ)(0, x) in the first variation formula for V , we get
               Z
                             1                              r
(3.11)           nφ(r/ρ) − ∥πS − πP0 ∥2 φ(r/ρ) + |∇S r|2 φ′ (r/ρ) dV (X, S) = 0.
                             2                              ρ

Now by the divergence theorem (or using the above in the special case where V is the multiplicity
one plane P0 ):
                    Z                          Z
                                                             r
                0 = div(x, φ(r/ρ)) dH (x) = nφ(r/ρ) + φ′ (r/ρ) dHn (x).
                                        n
                                                             ρ

We know (from the fact V is represented by a multi-valued graph) that V is a Q-cover of P0 in this
region, and so this and the area formula gives
                               Z                     
                                               r ′
(3.12)                     0=       nφ(r/ρ) + φ (r/ρ) JπP0 dV (X, S)
                                               ρ

where JπP0 is the Jacobian of πP0 : spt∥V ∥ → P0 . If we now consider (3.10) + 2ρ1−n · (3.11) −
                                               ⊥
2ρ1−n · (3.12), we get, using |∇S r|2 = 1 − |∇S r|2 ,
                                        Z
                                              ⊥
(3.13)                  D′ (ρ) = −2ρ−n |∇S r|2 rφ′ (r/ρ) dV (X, S) + error2

where
                           Z                                               
                                    1                                 r ′
        error2 := 2ρ 1−n
                                 1 − ∥πS − πP0 ∥2 − JπP0     nφ(r/ρ) + φ (r/ρ) dV (X, S).
                                    4                                 ρ

We then make one small further modification to the expression for D′ (ρ). Notice that (see [KW23a,
(3.61)])
                              ⊥      |πP ⊥ (∇S r)|2
                           |∇S r|2 −     0
                                                    = O(∥πS − πP0 ∥4 )
                                        |∇S r|2
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                   27

(note that ∇S r ̸= 0 here, since ∇S r = 0 would mean S is orthogonal to P0 which cannot happen
due to our estimates in Definition 1.2), and so we actually have
                                  Z |π ⊥ (∇S r)|2
                                      P
(3.14)           ′
               D (ρ) = −2ρ   −n             0
                                                      · rφ′ (r/ρ) dV (X, S) + error2 + error3
                                        |∇S r|2

where (recall −φ′ ≥ 0)
                                            Z                         
                                      1−n                 4    r ′
                     |error3 | ≤ Cρ             ∥πS − πP0 ∥ · − φ (r/ρ) dV (X, S).
                                                               ρ

Step 4: Control error2 and error3 . In order to show the approximate monotonicity of the
planar frequency (which is done in Step 5), we will need to control |error2 | and |error3 | in terms of
D(ρ). Notice first that from (3.6), we know that D(ρ) is comparable to
                                               Z
                                  D(ρ) = ρ
                                   e       2−n
                                                 |Du|2 φ(r/ρ) dx

and that (see [KW23a, (3.62)])

                               1
                            1 − ∥πS − πP0 ∥2 − JπP0 = O(∥πS − πP0 ∥4 ).
                               4
Thus, in order to control error2 and error3 , we can instead control
                             Z                                             Z
                         1−n        4                                  1−n
            error2,1 := ρ      |Du| φ(r/ρ)       and      error2,2 := ρ                      |Du|4
                                                                                  Bρ \Bρ/2


in terms of D(ρ)
            e    (here, we have used that φ′ (r/ρ) = −21Rk ×(Bρ \Bρ/2 ) , and so r/ρ ∈ [1/2, 1] in this
part of the integrand). These are fourth order error terms in Du. Notice that using the bound
|Du(x)| ≤ Lrα a.e. from (3.1), we get
                                               Z
                                 2 2α−1    2−n
                     error2,1 ≤ L ρ     ·ρ       |Du|2 φ(r/ρ) = L2 ρ2α−1 D(ρ).
                                                                           e

Thus, we just need to bound error2,2 . The reader will then note the difficulty: the integral in
error2,2 occurs over Bρ \ Bρ/2 , whilst the “main” part of D(ρ)
                                                           e    (i.e. coming from that where φ(r/ρ)
                  2
        R
is 1) is B |Du| . One therefore wishes to control the energy of u on Bρ \ B ρ/2 by that on Bρ/2 :
           ρ/2
this essentially amounts to wanting Du to satisfy a doubling condition. However, even though we
know that the coarse blow-ups satisfy a doubling condition, we cannot pass this to the blow-up
sequence at every scale ρ. Our argument therefore needs to be more refined: for this we argue as
in [KW23a], utilising Lemma 2.6.




Thus, in order to control error2,2 , it suffices to bound
                                                         Z
                                         error∗2 := ρ1−n   |Du|4
                                                              Bρ
28               BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

in terms of D(ρ).
            e     For this, fix ρ ∈ (0, 1/4). For each ξ ∈ Bρ (0) set
                                (               Z                                              )
                       σ ξ := sup σ ∈ (0, ρ/2] :                     |Du|2 ≥ ωn L2 (64σ)n+2α
                                                          Bσ (ξ)


where we take the convention that sup ∅ = 0. Here, ωn = Hn (B1n (0)). We know from the estimate
(3.1) that for all ξ ∈ Bρ (0) and σ ∈ [ρ/32, ρ/2],
             Z                Z
                         2
                     |Du| ≤           |Du|2 ≤ L2 (3ρ/2)2α · ωn (3ρ/2)n ≤ L2 ωn (48σ)n+2α
              Bσ (ξ)           B3ρ/2 (0)

and thus we see that σ ξ ≤ ρ/32. Now set

                                           S := {ξ ∈ Bρ (0) : σ ξ > 0}.

Notice that for ξ ∈ Bρ (0) \ S we have |Du(ξ)| = 0. By the Vitali covering lemma, there is a
countable set of points {ξi }i ⊂ S such that {B2σi /5 (ξi )}i is a pairwise disjoint collection of balls
such that {B2σi (ξi )}i covers S, where σi := σ ξi . By definition of σ ξ we have
                                  Z
                                           |Du|2 ≤ ωn L2 (256σi )n+2α
                                      B4σi (ξi )


and so, as L = C ÊV is small, this corresponds to saying that the tilt-excess of V in the cylinder
Rk × B4σi (ξi ) is small. Thus, applying Theorem 2.2 in this cylinder, we see that on B2σi (ξi ) we
have                                                      !1/2
                                              Z
                    |Du| ≤ σi−1 · C (4σi )2−n       |Du|2      ≤ CLσiα       a.e.,
                                                        B4σi (ξi )

where here C = C(V) ∈ (0, ∞), and hence
                                 Z
(3.15)                                  |Du|4 ≤ CL4 σin+4α .
                                           B2σi (ξi )

Since ξi ∈ Bρ (0) and σi ≤ ρ/32, we may find a ball Bσi /5 (ζi ) ⊂ B2σi /5 (ξi ) ∩ Bρ (0). By definition of
σi we have
                                 Z
(3.16)                                  |Du|2 ≥ ωn L2 (64σi )n+2α
                                       Bσi (ξi )

and from the original bound on |Du| within B8σi (ξi ) ⊂ B1/2 (0) from the definition of σ ξi we have
                                  Z
                                                 |Du|2 ≤ ωn L2 (64 · 8σi )n+2α
                                    B8σi (ξi )

and so, using the fact that α < 1, we get
                               Z                   Z
                                          2   −n−2
                                      |Du| ≥ 8                                      |Du|2 .
                                   Bσi (ξi )                           B8σi (ξi )
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                                                    29

Thus, we are in a situation to use Lemma 2.6: we get that there exists a constant β = β(V) ∈ (0, 1)
such that
                                Z                   Z
(3.17)                                       2
                                        |Du| ≥ β  2
                                                             |Du|2 .
                                        Bσi /10 (ζi )                            B8σi (ξi )


Using simple inclusions and (3.16), (3.17), we clearly have
           Z                        Z                     Z
(3.18)                          2
                           |Du| ≥                  2
                                              |Du| ≥ β  2
                                                                                                    |Du|2 ≥ β 2 ωn L2 (64σi )n+2α .
             B2σi /5 (ξi )∩Bρ (0)              Bσi /5 (ζi )                            B8σi (ξi )


Now since Bσi /5 (ζi ) ⊂ Bρ (0), we have that r ≤ ρ − σi /10 on Bσi /10 (ζi ), and thus φ(r/ρ) ≥ σi /(5ρ)
on Bσi /10 (ζi ). Thus, from (3.18) and (3.17),
                                                      Z                                                  Z
                                                                                              −2
              2       2
            β ωn L (64σi )         n+1+2α
                                            ≤ 64σi                                2
                                                                         |Du| ≤ 64β                 σi                   |Du|2
                                                        B2σi /5 (ξi )                                    Bσi /10 (ζi )
                                                                                                         Z
                                                                                               −2
                                                                                      ≤ 320β         ρ                |Du|2 φ(r/ρ)
                                                                                                             Bρ (0)

                                                                                      ≤ 320β −2 · ρn−1 D(ρ),
                                                                                                       e

which gives the bound
                                                                   2                    1
(3.19)                                       σi ≤ CL− n+1+2α e
                                                            D(ρ) n+1+2α .

where C = C(V).

Recalling now that we had a cover of S, we therefore have from (3.15), (3.18), and (3.19) (as
|Du| = 0 on Bρ (0) \ S)
           Z            Z          XZ
                      4        4
                 |Du| =   |Du| ≤              |Du|4
             Bρ (0)                 S             i         B2σi (ξi )
                                                      X
                                              ≤C             L4 σin+4α
                                                        i
                                                      X                  Z
                                              ≤C             L2 σi2α                                 |Du|2
                                                        i                 B2σi /5 (ξi )∩Bρ (0)
                                                             4α
                                                        2− n+1+2α                    2α       XZ
                                              ≤ CL                e      D(ρ)      n+1+2α                                    |Du|2
                                                                                               i      B2σi /5 (ξi )∩Bρ (0)
                                                                             Z
                                              ≤ CL2−2γ e
                                                      D(ρ)γ                            |Du|2 ,
                                                                             Bρ (0)

                                       2α
where here C = C(V) ∈ (0, ∞) and γ = n+1+2α .

Notice that by using (3.6), we can then instead change this into a bound depending on terms closer
to D(ρ) instead of D(ρ),
                    e     and so we have
                   Z                            Z
                         |Du|4 ≤ CL2−2γ D(ρ)γ             ∥πS − πP0 ∥2 dV (X, S).
                          Bρ (0)                                       Rk ×Bρ (0)
30                 BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

But now noting that φ(r/ρ) − ρr φ′ (r/ρ) = 1 on Rk × Bρ/2 (0) and = 2 on Rk × (Bρ (0) \ B ρ/2 (0)),
we have
            Z                                   Z                              
                                                                         r
                        ∥πS − πP0 ∥2 dV (X, S) ≤ ∥πS − πP0 ∥2 φ(r/ρ) − φ′ (r/ρ)
             Rk ×Bρ (0)                                                  ρ
                                                 = 2(n − 1)ρn−2 D(ρ) + 2ρn−1 D′ (ρ).

Thus, we see that
                    Z
                              |Du|4 ≤ CL2−2γ D(ρ)γ (n − 1)ρn−2 D(ρ) + ρn−1 D′ (ρ)
                                                                                 
                     Bρ (0)

and hence
                         |error∗2 | ≤ CL2−2γ ρ−1 D(ρ)γ (n − 1)D(ρ) + ρD′ (ρ)
                                                                            

which is our desired bound. To summarise, we have now shown

             |error2 | + |error3 | ≤ L2 ρ2α−1 D(ρ) + CL2−2γ ρ−1 D(ρ)γ (n − 1)D(ρ) + ρD′ (ρ) .
                                                                                           
(3.20)

Step 5: Establish the approximate monotonicity of the planar frequency. Now we are in
a position to prove the almost monotonicity of the planar frequency function. We compute, using
(3.14), (3.9), (3.7):

d              D′ (ρ)H(ρ) − H ′ (ρ)D(ρ)
   log N (ρ) =
dρ                    D(ρ)H(ρ)
                                 |πP ⊥ (∇S r)|2
                         " Z                                         ! Z
                2ρ1−2n
                                                                                              
                                      0             ′                        2  S 21   ′
             =                                  r(−φ (r/ρ)) dV (X, S)     |y| |∇ r| (−φ (r/ρ))
               D(ρ)H(ρ)              |∇S r|2                                         r
                    Z                                2 #
                                                             error2 error3 error1
                −      (y, 0) · πP ⊥ (∇S r)(−φ′ (r/ρ))     +        +       −       .
                                  0                           D(ρ)    D(ρ)     H(ρ)

By Cauchy–Schwarz (noting that −φ′ ≥ 0) the non-error part of this expression is ≥ 0, and thus
we have
                        d               |error1 | |error2 | |error3 |
                          log N (ρ) ≥ −          −         −          .
                       dρ                H(ρ)      D(ρ)      D(ρ)
Now to control these error terms, we use (3.8) and (3.20). Indeed, (3.8) gives

                                       |error1 |
                                                 ≤ 2Q(n + 1)L2 ρ2α−1
                                        H(ρ)

and (3.20) gives

            |error2 | + |error3 |
                                  ≤ L2 ρ2α−1 + CL2−2γ ρ−1 D(ρ)γ−1 (n − 1)D(ρ) + ρD′ (ρ) .
                                                                                       
                   D(ρ)

Recalling from (3.1) that |Du(x)| ≤ Lrα for a.e. x, we therefore have D(ρ) ≤ CL2 ρ2+2α , and so we
get

               |error2 | + |error3 |
                                     ≤ L2 ρ2α−1 + CL2 ρ2γ+2γα−1 + CL2−2γ D(ρ)γ−1 D′ (ρ)
                      D(ρ)
            BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                           31

                                       ≤ CL2 ρ2γ(1+α)−1 + CL2−2γ D(ρ)γ−1 D′ (ρ)

since 2α − 1 ≥ 2γ + 2γα − 1. Thus we see

               d
                  log N (ρ) ≥ −CL2 ρ2α−1 − CL2 ρ2γ(1+α)−1 − CL2−2γ D(ρ)γ−1 D′ (ρ)
               dρ
                                 ≥ −CL2 ρ2γ(1+α)−1 − CL2−2γ D(ρ)γ−1 D′ (ρ).

Integrating this inequality over an interval [σ, ρ] we get
                                                          
          log N (ρ) − log N (σ) ≥ −CL2 ρ2γ(1+α) − σ 2γ(1+α) − CL2−2γ (D(ρ)γ − D(σ)γ )

i.e.
                                                 2    2γ(1+α) −σ 2γ(1+α) )+L2−2γ (D(ρ)γ −D(σ)γ )
                      N (σ) ≤ N (ρ) · eCL (ρ                                                        .
Bounding again D(ρ) ≤ CL2 ρ2+2α , we therefore get for any 0 < σ ≤ ρ < 1/4,
                                                                     2 2γ(1+α)
                                           N (σ) ≤ N (ρ) · eCL ρ
                                2α
where C = C(V) and γ = γ(V) ≡ n+1+2α . This is the desired almost monotonicity of the planar
frequency.
To summarise, we have shown the following:

Theorem 3.2 (Approximate Monotonicity of Planar Frequency). There exists ε = ε(V) ∈ (0, 1)
such that the following holds. Suppose V ∈ V is such that 0 ∈ sing(V ) is a density Q singular point
of V with (unique) tangent cone Q|P0 | and ÊV < ε. Then, for all 0 < σ ≤ ρ < 1/4,
                     2      2γ(1+α) +C Ê2−2γ D(σ)γ                 2    2γ(1+α) +C Ê2−2γ D(ρ)γ
                 eC ÊV σ                V            N (σ) ≤ eC ÊV ρ                V            N (ρ),

and hence
                                                                    2   2γ(1+α)
                                          N (σ) ≤ N (ρ) · eC ÊV ρ                .
                                                                   2α
Here, α = α(V) ∈ (0, 1) is the constant from Definition 1.2, γ = n+1+2α , and C = C(V) ∈ (0, ∞).

Remark 3.3. In fact, now that one has a monotone frequency function, one can show a simpler
version of the doubling property one needed to control error∗2 . Consequently, one can then prove

                                         |error2 | + |error3 |
                                                               ≤ CL2 ρ2α−1
                                                D(ρ)

and consequently that
                                           d
                                              log N (ρ) ≥ −CL2 ρ2α−1 .
                                           dρ
This then gives the simpler-looking monotonicity property: for all 0 < σ ≤ ρ < 1/4,
                                             2   2α                 2   2α
                                         eC ÊV σ N (σ) ≤ eC ÊV ρ N (ρ).

This then simplifies the form of some properties later as well. We will not use this however, and
stick with the version in Theorem 3.2. We stress that the constant C in this remark would also
depend on the frequency value at (say) scale 1, whilst the corresponding constant C in Theorem
3.2 does not.
32                     BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

In the setting of Theorem 3.2, we see that the limit

                                                 NV (0) := lim N (ρ)
                                                             ρ↓0

always exists; we call NV (0) the planar frequency of V at 0. Of course, at any singular point of
such a varifold V where the (unique) tangent cone is a plane of multiplicity Q, then up to rotation,
translation, and scaling, the hypotheses of Theorem 3.2 are satisfied, and thus at any such singular
point Z we can define the frequency NV (Z) as the limit at 0 of the planar frequency centred at the
point Z and rotated so that the tangent plane is Q|P0 |.

Note: In the area-minimising case as in [KW23a], it is not known a priori whether there is a decay
rate above 1 at branch points, and the planar frequency function (among other things) is used to
establish that at Hn−2 a.e. branch point the decay rate must exceed 1 + α for some fixed constant
α depending only on n, m and a mass bound. See [KW23a], [KW23b]. In contrast to this, here
the generalised-C 1,α regularity of u guarantees (as just shown) that the planar frequency exists
and is approximately monotone at every such singular point, and the planar frequency takes values
≥ 1 + α.

Next, we deduce some elementary consequences of such a monotonicity result. The first is control
on the scale-invariant L2 -height in terms of the planar frequency function, which tells us that the
planar frequency captures the decay rate of the varifold to its tangent plane. This also provides a
uniform lower bound on the planar frequency value NV (0), which will be important for our blow-up
analysis later.

Corollary 3.4. There exists ε = ε(V) ∈ (0, 1) such that if V is as in Theorem 3.2 with this choice
of ε, then:

      (i) For all 0 < σ ≤ ρ < 1/4 we have

                        2N (ρ)eC Ê2V ρ2γ(1+α)                                           2NV (0)
         −C Ê2V ρ2α    σ                                        C(NV (0)+1)Ê2V ρ2γ(1+α)  σ
       e                                         H(ρ) ≤ H(σ) ≤ e                                     H(ρ);
                        ρ                                                                  ρ


     (ii) For all 0 < σ ≤ ρ ≤ 1/4 we have

                            2N (ρ)eC Ê2V ρ2γ(1+α)     Z
           1 −C Ê2 ρ2α     σ                         −n
              e   V                                  ρ          |u|2
           16               ρ                             B (0)
                                                        Z ρ
                                                 ≤ σ −n        |u|2
                                                         Bσ (0)
                                                                                  2NV (0)     Z
                                                      C(NV (0)+2)Ê2V ρ2γ(1+α)    σ          −n
                                                ≤ 16e                                       ρ           |u|2 ;
                                                                                  ρ              Bρ (0)



     (iii) NV (0) ≥ 1 + α.
                                                    2α
Here, α = α(V) ∈ (0, 1) is as in Theorem 2.2, γ = n+1+2α , and C = C(V) ∈ (0, ∞).

Remark: Thus, if V ∈ V and Z is a singular point at which the (unique) tangent cone is a plane
of multiplicity Q, then NV (Z) ≥ 1 + α, where α = α(V) ∈ (0, 1) is as in Theorem 2.2.
              BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                                                   33

Proof. Fix 0 < σ ≤ ρ < 1/4. From (3.7) and (3.9), we have for any τ ∈ [σ, ρ],

                                           H ′ (τ ) − 2τ −1 D(τ ) = error1 ,

which by dividing by H(τ ) and using (3.8) gives, for ε = ε(V) sufficiently small,

                                           H ′ (τ ) 2N (τ )
                                                   −        ≤ C Ê2V τ 2α−1
                                           H(τ )      τ

where C = C(V). Using the approximate monotonicity of N from Theorem 3.2 and the simple fact
that e−x ≥ 1 − x for all x ≥ 0, we get
                                                                                            2   2γ(1+α)
        2NV (0)                                   H ′ (τ )   2N (ρ)eC ÊV ρ
                − C(NV (0) + 1)Ê2V τ 2γ(1+α)−1 ≤          ≤                                              + C Ê2V τ 2α−1 .
          τ                                       H(τ )              τ

Integrating this over τ ∈ [σ, ρ] gives exactly (i).


To see (ii), note first that from the definition of H(τ ) and (3.4), for τ ∈ (0, 1/4) we have
                     Z                                                            Z
                1−n                   2 −1         2 2α       −n           2 2α
    H(τ ) ≤ 2τ                     |u| r (1 + C ÊV τ ) ≤ 4τ (1 + C ÊV τ )                   |u|2 ,
                       Bτ (0)\Bτ /2 (0)                                                                   Bτ (0)\Bτ /2 (0)

and so for ε sufficiently small,
                                                           Z
                                          1
                                            H(τ ) ≤ τ −n                           |u|2 .
                                          8                     Bτ (0)\Bτ /2 (0)

Moreover, again from the definition of H(τ ) and (3.4),
                  Z                                                                    Z
   H(τ ) ≥ 2τ 1−n               |u|2 r−1 (1 − C Ê2V τ 2α ) ≥ 2τ −n (1 − C Ê2V τ 2α )                                       |u|2 .
                       Bτ (0)\Bτ /2 (0)                                                                   Bτ (0)\Bτ /2 (0)

So combining the above we have
                                            Z
                         1
                           H(τ ) ≤ τ −n                         |u|2 ≤ 2(1 + C Ê2V τ 2α )H(τ ).
                         8                   Bτ (0)\Bτ /2 (0)


Apply this now with τ = σk := 2−k σ, k ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . }; noting that ex ≥ 1 + x for x ≥ 0, this gives
                                    Z
                     1           −n                                   2 2α
                       H(σk ) ≤ σk                       |u|2 ≤ 2eC ÊV σk H(σk ).
                     8                Bσ (0)\Bσ /2 (0)
                                                  k        k


Then, if we set ρk := 2−k ρ, we may apply the result in (i) of the present lemma with σ = σk , ρ = ρk
to get (noting σk /ρk = σ/ρ for all k, and also using Theorem 3.2)

                  n+2N (ρ)eC Ê2V ρ2γ(1+α) Z
  1 −C Ê2 ρ2α    σ
     e   V                                                       |u|2
  16              ρ                           Bρk (0)\Bρk /2 (0)
                                             Z
                                          ≤                       |u|2
                                                  Bσk (0)\Bσk /2 (0)
34               BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS
                                                                                n+2NV (0) Z
                                                    C(NV (0)+2)Ê2V ρ2γ(1+α)    σ
                                          ≤ 16e                                                               |u|2 .
                                                                                ρ            Bρ (0)\Bρ /2 (0)
                                                                                                  k      k


Summing this over k ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . } then gives (ii).
Finally, to see (iii) we use (ii), which gives for any 0 < σ ≤ ρ < 1/4 (using as well the estimates
from Theorem 2.2)

                            n+2N (ρ)eC Ê2V ρ2γ(1+α) Z             Z
            1 −C Ê2 ρ2α    σ                                     2
               e   V                                           |u| ≤         |u|2 ≤ C Ê2V σ n+2+2α .
            16              ρ                           Bρ (0)        Bσ (0)

For fixed ρ, if we now compare the powers of σ here, we see that one needs
                                              2     2γ(1+α)
                                         eC ÊV ρ             N (ρ) ≥ 1 + α

(else, dividing both sides by σ n+2+2α , we would get a contradiction if we took σ ↓ 0 for fixed ρ > 0).
Since this inequality must hold for every ρ > 0, if we now take ρ ↓ 0 we see that NV (0) ≥ 1 + α. □

We also have upper semi-continuity of the planar frequency among singular points where the
(unique) tangent cone is a plane with multiplicity Q.

Corollary 3.5 (Upper Semi-Continuity of Planar Frequency). Suppose (Vj )j ⊂ V and V ∈ V are
such that Vj ⇀ V . Suppose also that Z ∈ sing(V ) is such that V has a (unique) tangent cone P
at Z which is a multiplicity Q tangent plane, and Zj ∈ spt∥Vj ∥ are such that Vj has a (unique)
tangent cone Pj at Zj which is a multiplicity Q tangent plane. Then:

                                         NV (Z) ≥ lim sup NVj (Zj ).
                                                          j→∞

In fact, for any ρj → ρ with ρ > 0 sufficiently small we have

                                       lim NVj ,Pj ,Zj (ρj ) = NV,P,Z (ρ).
                                       j→∞


Proof. We may translate to assume without loss of generality that Z = 0, and rescale to assume
(by Definition 1.2) that V is represented by a Lipschitz Q-valued graph in B1n+k (0). We may also
rotate to assume that the (unique) tangent cone to V at Z is Q|P0 |. Assuming j is sufficiently large,
we may assume that for all j we have ÊVj < ε, for ε as in Theorem 2.2. We may also translate
and rotate the Vj to assume that Zj = 0 and that the unique tangent cone to Vj at Zj is Pj := P0
for all j (this is possible as such operations do not change the value of the frequency function).
Thus, Vj , V (respectively) are all expressible in Rk × B1/2
                                                          n (0) as generalised-C 1,α functions u , u
                                                                                                  j
                  n              k
(respectively) B1/2 (0) → AQ (R ), obeying the estimates in Theorem 2.2; note that these estimates
have constants which are independent of j. In particular, we in fact have local uniform convergence
of the uj to u, as well as locally strong convergence in W 1,2 . This readily gives

                   HVj ,Pj ,Zj (ρ) → HV,P,Z (ρ)          and        DVj ,Pj ,Zj (ρ) → DV,P,Z (ρ)

for all ρ ∈ (0, 1/4). Thus, as HV,P,Z (ρ) > 0 for all ρ ∈ (0, 1/4) (if not, then as shown before V must
agree with 2|P0 | in some neighbourhood of Z and so as mentioned the conclusion is automatically
true), we have
                          NVj ,Pj ,Zj (ρ) → NV,P,Z (ρ)    for any ρ ∈ (0, 1/4).
               BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                                 35

But then, using the approximate monotonicity of the frequency given by Theorem 3.2, we have for
any ρ ∈ (0, 1/4),

                                               C Ê2V ρ2γ(1+α)                          2     2γ(1+α)
              lim sup NVj (Zj ) ≤ lim sup e           j          NVj ,Pj ,Zj (ρ) = eC ÊV ρ             NV,P,Z (ρ)
               j→∞                    j→∞


(we can ensure that ÊVj → ÊV using the strong convergence in W 1,2 , up to rescaling the domain).
                                                        2α
Here, C = C(V) ∈ (0, ∞), α = α(V) ∈ (0, 1), and γ = n+1+2α    are independent of j. Taking ρ ↓ 0
we then get the result.                                                                          □


Finally, we establish a form of upper semi-continuity between the planar frequency at points along
a blow-up sequence with the Almgren frequency function of the limiting coarse blow-up.

Corollary 3.6 (Upper Semi-Continuity along Blow-Up Sequences). Let v ∈ BV be the coarse
blow-up of a sequence of varifolds (Vj )j ⊂ V. Suppose that Zj = (ζj , ξj ) ∈ sing(Vj ) ∩ (Rk × B1/2n (0))

are such that the (unique) tangent cone to Vj at Zj is a plane Pj with multiplicity Q. Suppose that
           n
ξj → ξ ∈ B 1/2 (0), and set ℓva ,ξ (x) := va (ξ) + (x − ξ) · Dva (ξ). Finally, assume that v ̸≡ QJℓva ,ξ K in
  n (0). Then:
B1/2
                                       Nv−ℓva ,ξ (ξ) ≥ lim sup NVj (Zj ).
                                                             j→∞

In fact, for any ρj → ρ with ρ > 0 sufficiently small we have

                                        lim NVj ,Pj ,Zj (ρj ) = Nv−ℓva ,ξ ,ξ (ρ).
                                        j→∞



Proof. By Theorem 2.2 we know that for all j sufficiently large we have Vj (Rk × B3/4             n (0)) is

represented by the graph of a generalised-C 1,α function uj : B3/4    n (0) → A (Rk ), with an estimate.
                                                                                    Q
By translating and rescaling, we may assume that ξ = 0. Note that the plane Pj is in fact given by
the tangent plane to the average (uj )a , i.e. it is the graph of ℓj (x) := (uj )a (ξj )+(x−ξj )·D(uj )a (ξj ).

We now claim that ℓj /ÊVj converges locally in C 1 to ℓva ,ξ ; to see this, it suffices to show that
(uj )a (ξj )/ÊVj → va (ξ) and D(uj )a (ξj )/ÊVj → Dva (ξ). The former follows from the proof of the
Hardt–Simon inequality for coarse blow-ups (cf. [BKMW25, (B5)]). For the latter, it suffices to
show10 that one can always find a subsequence for which it is true. For this, notice that from
the estimates in Definition 1.2 we always have |D(uj )a (ξj )| ≤ C ÊVj , and so up to passing to a
subsequence we know D(uj )a (ξj )/ÊVj → Λ for some Λ. But then since for any given ρ > 0, again
from the estimates in Definition 1.2, we have
                                  Z
                             −n−2
                           ρ                   dist2 (x, Pj ) d∥Vj ∥(x) ≤ Cρ2α ÊV2j ,
                                      Rk ×Bρn (ξj )


if we divide this by ÊV2j and take j → ∞, we get
                                        Z
                                 −n−2
                                ρ                  |v − va (ξ) − Λ · (x − ξ)|2 ≤ Cρ2α
                                         Bρn (ξ)


10Using the standard analysis fact that a necessary condition for a sequence to converge is if every subsequence always
has a further subsequence which converges to the given limit.
36               BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

and thus                           Z
                            −n−2
                           ρ                    |va − va (ξ) − Λ · (x − ξ)|2 ≤ Cρ2α .
                                      Bρn (ξ)

Since this is true for all ρ > 0 and va is a smooth (harmonic) function (cf. [BKMW25, (B2)]), we
see that we must have Λ = Dva (ξ). Hence, we have now shown that D(uj )a (ξj )/ÊVj → Dva (ξ).

We now know that ℓj /ÊVj converges locally in C 1 to ℓva ,ξ . In particular, if we translate Vj by
Zj and then perform an appropriate (small) rotation which maps the plane given by the graph of
ℓj − (uj )a (ξj ) (which is a subspace) to P0 ≡ {0}k × Rn , then we see that, arguing as in [BKMW25,
(B3III)], that the blow-up of the resulting sequence is, up to a translation and rescaling, v − ℓva ,ξ .
Thus, it suffices to prove the case where Zj ≡ 0, Pj ≡ P0 , (uj )a (0) = 0, D(uj )a (0) = 0, and thus
ℓva ,ξ ≡ ℓva ,0 = 0.

However in this case, due to the locally strong convergence in W 1,2 along the blow-up sequence
provided by Definition 1.2, for each ρ ∈ (0, 1/4) we have
                                Z                                                      Z
  1                                  2 −1 ′                1
       HVj ,Pj ,Zj (ρ) → −ρ 1−n
                                  |v| r φ (r/ρ)   and           DVj ,Pj ,Zj (ρ) → ρ2−n
                                                                                         |Dv|2 φ(r/ρ),
 ÊV2j                                                    ÊV2j

i.e. for every ρ ∈ (0, 1/4) we have

                                            ρ2−n |Dv|2 φ(r/ρ)
                                                R
                         NVj ,Pj ,Zj (ρ) →      R                  =: Nv,0 (ρ)
                                           −ρ1−n |v|2 r−1 φ′ (r/ρ)

where Nv,0 (ρ) is the Almgren frequency function of v (with the usual modification incorporating
the cut-off function φ). Notice that here we may assume that Nv,0 (ρ) > 0 for each such ρ (and thus
HVj ,Pj ,Zj (ρ) > 0 for j sufficiently large), else |v| ≡ 0 on Bρ (0) which contradicts that v ̸≡ QJ0K on
  n (0). As the above is true for every ρ > 0, using the approximate monotonicity of the planar
B1/2
frequency function from Theorem 3.2, we see that for every ρ ∈ (0, 1/4),

                                                       C Ê2V ρ2γ(1+α)
                   lim sup NVj (Zj ) ≤ lim sup e           j             NVj ,Pj ,Zj (ρ) = Nv,0 (ρ).
                     k→∞                        j→∞

Taking ρ ↓ 0 then completes the proof.                                                                 □


Remark: The expression for the Almgren frequency function of a coarse blow-up v ∈ BV appearing
in Corollary 3.6 is slightly different than the one used in Theorem 2.4, since in Corollary 3.6 it
includes the cut-off function in the definition. If one takes a more general φ and lets φ → 1[0,1] ,
one can recover the version of the frequency function used in Theorem 2.4. The difference is not
substantial, however, and in Theorem 2.4 one could alternatively used the modified version above.
We stress however that the difference is more substantial for the planar frequency function, as
indeed our proof of the estimate controlling error∗2 depended on the gradient of the cut-off φ, and
the constant involved goes to ∞ as φ → 1[0,1] .

3.2. Dimension bound for branch points with planar frequency ̸= 2. Here we argue simi-
larly to the corresponding part in [KW26a]. Fix V ∈ V and write BVQ for the set of singular points
Z of V at which V has a (unique) tangent cone which is a plane with multiplicity Q. We know from
Theorem 3.2 that each Z ∈ BVQ has a well-defined planar frequency value which, from Corollary
3.4(iii), takes values in [1 + α, ∞) for some fixed α = α(V) ∈ (0, 1). We then partition BVQ into
               BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                                   37

three subsets based on the planar frequency value as follows:

                                               BVQ = BV<2 ∪ BV2 ∪ BV>2

where for p ∈ [1, ∞), BV<p = {Z ∈ BVQ : NV (Z) < p}, BVp = {Z ∈ BVQ : NV (Z) = p}, and
BV>p = {Z ∈ BVQ : NV (Z) > p} (we have dropped the Q dependence in the notation for these latter
sets for simplicity).
In this section, we use the properties of the planar frequency previously established to prove a
dimension bound on the size of BV<2 and BV>2 . In Section 4 we will show the same dimension bound
for BV2 (and in fact, the argument in Section 4 also establishes the dimension bound for BV>2 ).
Our main result here is therefore:

Proposition 3.7. If V ∈ V, then dimH (BV<2 ∪ BV>2 ) ≤ n − 2.

Remark: Our argument will utilise Almgren’s dimension reduction via stratification [Alm00]. One
could also use Federer’s dimension reduction, arguing by contradiction assuming that Hs (B1 (0) ∩
(BV<2 ∪ BV>2 )) > 0 for some s > n − 2 and then performing a coarse blow-up about a good density
point for this set, using the approximate monotonicity of the planar frequency function to ultimately
reach a contradiction by producing a coarse blow-up which has a branch set of Hausdorff dimension
> n − 2. The advantage of arguing via Almgren’s stratification is that it will detect a subspace
which nearby points of “good frequency” must accumulate to, providing the natural starting point
towards proving that the branch set is countably (n − 2)-rectifiable (although we do not pursue
this question in the present work).

Proof. First, fix Z ∈ BVQ . Up to rotation and translation, without loss of generality we may assume
that Z = 0 and that the (unique) tangent cone to V at Z is Q|P0 |. Take any sequence σj ↓ 0, and
produce a coarse blow-up v ∈ BV of the sequence Vj := (η0,σj )# V . Corollary 3.6, with Pj ≡ P0
and Zj ≡ 0 for all j, gives that for each ρ > 0,

                                         NVj (ρ) ≡ NVj ,P0 ,0 (ρ) → Nv,0 (ρ)

(note that all of these quantities are well-defined by the estimates in Corollary 3.4). However, as the
Vj are simply rescalings of V about a fixed point, we know that NVj (ρ) = NVj ,P0 ,Z (ρρj ) → NV (Z)
for every ρ > 0, and thus we see that

                                                  Nv,0 (ρ) = NV (Z)

for every ρ > 0. In particular, this tells us that Nv (0) = NV (Z). As Nv,0 (ρ) is constant in ρ,
we have that v is a homogeneous function11 with degree of homogeneity exactly NV (Z) (here, as
explained in the footnote, we can ensure that v is naturally defined on all of Rn ). In particular,
v ̸≡ 0, since ∥vj ∥L2 (B1 (0) ≡ 1 and as vj → v uniformly on compact subsets of Rn we therefore
have ∥v∥L2 (B1 (0)) = 1. Moreover, by standard properties of frequency functions for homogeneous
blow-ups, we know that Nv (z) ≤ Nv (0) for all z ∈ Rn , and that if S(v) denotes the spine of v
11The reader should note that the estimates in Definition 1.2 and Arzelà–Ascoli readily give that the blow-up is
β-Hölder continuous for any β ∈ (0, 1). In fact, by Definition 1.2 and Corollary 3.4, for each ρ ∈ [1, ∞) we have
Vj Cρ (0) = v(uj ) where ∥uj ∥C 0,1 (Bρ (0)) ≤ Cρ ÊVj , provided j is sufficiently large, where Cρ ∈ (0, ∞) is a constant
depending on ρ but not on j. Thus, Arzelà–Ascoli gives that vj := uj /ÊVj → v uniformly on compact subsets of
Rn . Since vj → v locally uniformly, we also know that Lip(v|Bρ (0) ) ≤ lim inf j→∞ Lip(vj |Bρ (0) ) ≤ Cρ . Thus, we may
assume that v is defined on all of Rn .
38                BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

(namely, the set of points under which v is translation invariant, which is a subspace due to the
homogeneity of v), then
                               S(v) = {z ∈ Rn : Nv (z) = Nv (0)}.
From Corollary 3.4(iii), we know that Nv (0) = NV (Z) ≥ 1 + α. Thus, dim S(v) ̸∈ {n − 1, n}.
Indeed, if dim S(v) = n, then v is constant, yet we know v(0) = 0, which means that v ≡ 0, which
contradicts v not being identically zero. Also, if dim S(v) = n − 1, then graph(v) would be a union
of half-planes whose boundaries meet along an (n − 1)-dimensional subspace which would mean
Nv (0) = 1, contradicting Nv (0) ≥ 1 + α.

Thus, dim S(v) ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , n − 2}. We may therefore stratify BVQ as follows. For each Z ∈ BVQ ,
write BZ for the set of all coarse blow-ups constructed in the above manner by sequences of
rescalings of V centred at Z. Then, necessarily each v ∈ BZ is a homogeneous function in BV which
has degree of homogeneity ≥ 1+α and spine dimension at most n−2. For each j ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n−2},
set
                           Sj := {Z ∈ BVQ : dim S(v) ≤ j for all v ∈ BZ }.
Clearly by definition S0 ⊂ S1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Sn−2 = BQ
                                                V . So far everything we have discussed has been
              Q
for any Z ∈ BV . We now claim that for each j ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , n − 2},

(3.21)                                 dimH (Sj ∩ (BV<2 ∪ BV>2 )) ≤ j.

Evidently (3.21) proves the proposition by taking j = n − 2. Proving (3.21) will follow by standard
arguments related to stratifications provided we can show that, for each Z ∈ BV<2 ∪ BV>2 , nearby
points with planar frequency ≥ NV (Z) − ε must concentrate around the spine of a blow-up in BZ
(for sufficiently small ε). Indeed, without loss of generality we may assume Z = 0 with the unique
tangent plane at Z being Q|P0 |, take any sequence σj ↓ 0 and again set Vj := (η0,σj )# V . Consider
any point z ∈ B1n (0) for which there exist Zj = (ζj , ξj ) singular points of Vj at which the (unique)
tangent cone is a multiplicity Q plane such that ξj → z, and NVj (Zj ) ≥ NV (Z) − δj for some
sequence δj ↓ 0. Then, from Corollary 3.6, we know that

                            Nv−ℓva ,z (z) ≥ lim sup NVj (Zj ) ≥ NV (Z) = Nv (0).
                                             j→∞

Thus, to complete the proof we need to show that this implies z ∈ S(v). To do this, we need
to show that Nv (z) = Nv (0), which from the above is equivalent to showing that ℓva ,z ≡ 0;
this is where we will need to use that NV (Z) ̸= 2. We split this into two cases (recall here
Nv (0) = NV (Z) ∈ [1 + α, ∞) \ {2}).

First, suppose that Nv (0) ∈ [1 + α, ∞) \ Z, i.e. Nv (0) is not an integer. Then if va ̸≡ 0, va would be
a harmonic function (cf. [BKMW25, (B2)]) which is homogeneous of some non-integer degree: this
is impossible, and thus we must have va ≡ 0. This of course then implies that ℓva ,z ≡ 0 for every
z ∈ B1n (0), and thus Nv−ℓva ,z (z) = Nv (z) ≥ Nv (0), implying that Nv (z) = Nv (0) and so z ∈ S(v).
This shows that Zk must be concentrating on S(v), which has dimension ≤ k.

Lastly, we just need to show this claim when Nv (0) ∈ {3, 4, . . . }. Here, we cannot argue that va ≡ 0.
Instead, we will argue that ℓva ,z ≡ 0 for the points z as above. Indeed, notice that here we have, by
assumption, that Nv−ℓva ,z (z) ≥ Nv (0) ≥ 3. This tells us that, as va is a smooth harmonic function,
that va −ℓva ,z vanishes to degree at least 2. Hence, 0 = Dx2 (va −ℓva ,z )(z) = Dx2 va (z), as ℓva ,z is linear
and so Dx2 ℓva ,z (x) ≡ 0. We now argue that this with the homogeneity of va implies Dva (z) = 0.
Indeed, consider for any i ∈ {1, . . . , n} the function w(t) := Di va (tz) for t > 0. Since D2 va (z) = 0,
we evidently have w′ (1) = 0. However, since va is homogeneous of degree Nv (0), we know that
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                      39

Di va is homogeneous of degree Nv (0) − 1, and hence w(t) = tNv (0)−1 w(1) = tNv (0)−1 Di va (z).
But then w′ (t) = (Nv (0) − 1)tNv (0)−2 Di va (z), and hence 0 = w′ (1) = (Nv (0) − 1)Di va (z). As
Nv (0) − 1 ≥ 2, evidently we must have Di va (z) = 0, and hence as this is true for each i ∈ {1, . . . , n}
we see that Dva (z) = 0. But we can then of course repeat this argument (with w(t) = va (tz)), as
Nv (0) > 2, to similarly get that va (z) = 0. In particular, at such z we have ℓva ,z ≡ 0, and so again
Nv (z) = Nv−ℓva ,z (z) = Nv (0), and thus z ∈ S(v).

This therefore shows that the set Sk ∩(BV<2 ∪BV>2 ) has the desired subspace approximation property
in order to show that its Hausdorff dimension is at most k, completing the proof (cf. [Sim96, Section
3.4, Lemma 3]).                                                                                     □


Note: One sees that the above proof does not show that the set BV2 of points of planar frequency
exactly 2 has Hausdorff dimension ≤ n − 2. Indeed, one cannot show that ℓv,z ≡ 0 at the points z
in question, as it is possible for va − ℓva ,z to vanish to degree 2 (i.e. be of quadratic order) at every
point, e.g. if n = 2 and va (x, y) = x2 − y 2 . Indeed, if va is non-zero and homogeneous of degree 2,
then va − ℓva ,z must vanish to degree 2 at every point z (by Taylor’s theorem and the homogeneity).

Remark 3.8. Whilst the above proof does not control the size of BV2 , if for each n-dimensional
subspace P ⊂ Rn+k we set
                              BV2,P := {Z ∈ BV2 : TZ V = P }
then the proof does show that dimH (BV2,P ) ≤ n − 2, i.e. points where the planar frequency is 2 and
the tangent cone is a given plane has Hausdorff dimension at most n−2 (this follows because one can
arrange that the linear function ℓv,z arising at the end of the proof of Proposition 3.7 has vanishing
derivative, from which knowing the planar frequency is 2 is enough to conclude in the analogous
manner). In particular, if we knew that the stationary varifold V was represented by a Q-valued
Lipschitz graph with zero average, then the tangent plane at any branch point is P0 (say), and so
we can conclude that the whole branch set has Hausdorff dimension ≤ n − 2 at this stage with no
further argument needed. Thus, the only situation which we do not know how to address as of now
is when locally about a frequency 2 branch point, there is a whole continuum of frequency 2 branch
points all with different tangent planes. Note that also for this, the problematic case (if one was
arguing by contradiction, blowing-up around a point of positive Hs -upper density for some s > 0)
is when the coarse blow-up coincides with a multiplicity Q single-valued harmonic function which
is homogeneous of degree 2. To deal with this, we need a more complicated argument involving a
center manifold (see Section 4).

Remark 3.9. The above proof also has the following interesting consequence. Suppose V ∈ V
(for instance, we could take V = VL as in Corollary 1.7). Suppose Z ∈ BVQ is a singular point of V
where the (unique) tangent cone is Q|P0 |, and the planar frequency of V at Z is ̸= 2. Then, for all
δ > 0, there is a radius r > 0 (depending on V and δ) such that if Z̃ ∈ BV has planar frequency
NV (Z̃) ≥ NV (Z) − δ and |Z − Z̃| < r, then not only must Z̃ be within δ of a subspace of dimension
≤ n − 2, but also

(3.22)                               dist(Z̃, P0 ) ≤ δ ÊV,P0 (B2r (Z)).

Indeed, this follows from combining the proofs of Corollary 3.5 and Proposition 3.7, as indeed in
the proof of Proposition 3.7 we showed that the linear part of the average of the blow-up vanishes
at the limit of such points. Furthermore, these also give

(3.23)                   distH (TZ̃ V ∩ B1 (0), P0 ∩ B1 (0)) ≤ δ ÊV,P0 (B2r (Z)).
40                 BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

The inequality (3.22) should be compared to the corollary of the Lojasiewicz inequality which says
that for a (single-valued) minimal graph u, if Du(x) = 0 then there is a neighbourhood of x such
that any point y in this neighbourhood which obeys Du(y) = 0 necessarily also obeys u(y) = u(x).
Because points of non-integer planar frequency do not occur in the setting of single-valued minimal
graphs, both (3.22) and (3.23) are most directly comparable when the point has planar frequency an
integer ≥ 3. Indeed, for single-valued minimal graphs u, the Lojasiewicz inequality gives that at any
point with D2 u(x) = 0, there is a neighbourhood of x for which any point y in this neighbourhood
with D2 u(y) = 0 necessarily has Du(x) = Du(y), and hence also u(x) = u(y). Both (3.22) and
(3.23) are weakened versions of these facts for V ∈ V, which due to the branching behaviour are
not in general known to satisfy a version of the Lojasiewicz inequality.

4. Dimension Bound on Planar Frequency ≥ 2 Branch Points via Center Manifold
To study the set of points where the planar frequency is 2 (or even ≥ 2) we utilise a center manifold.
We wish to take some time to summarise the idea, in light of planar frequency. The basic philosophy
is that we wish to measure the frequency of V relative to a more general manifold M instead of
a plane; indeed, if M is a plane, our discussion will reduce to the planar frequency. The manifold
M needs to satisfy some conditions for this to be possible:
     (A) M needs to be C 3 . This is necessary to mimic the first variation arguments we used to show
         the approximate monotonicity of the planar frequency function, namely variations normal
         to M and variations within M. The latter involves differentiating a vector field whose flow
         lines match the geodesic arcs emitting from a point, and for this M needs to be C 3 .
     (B) M cannot be arbitrary, but needs to have some “variational structure” itself. This is perhaps
         expected if one wishes there to be a frequency function with a monotonicity property in
         the first place, as the monotonicity arises from control on suitable variational identities.
         This requirement manifests itself analytically when one needs to establish suitable doubling
         conditions of V relative to M (cf. Lemma 2.6). This doubling property is needed to control
         certain error terms arising from our variational identities, as we saw in Section 3 for the
         planar frequency.
     (C) M should (ideally12) touch V at all points of interest, namely any point of planar frequency
         ≥ 2. This guarantees that the frequency value is non-trivial at points of interest. Morally,
         one is then able to control the size of the set of points with planar frequency ≥ 2 by instead
         controlling the touching set of two surfaces (or at least the relevant part of the touching
         set), in an analogous spirit to classical quantitative unique continuation problems.
     (D) A more subtle condition arises for general M: there are certain error terms which arise in
         the first variation arguments which are linear in the average of the normal map representing
         V over M (assuming such a map exists); this is in addition to other errors which are, in
         theory, higher order. One needs to control such linear error terms in some manner. If M
         were a minimal surface itself, these linear errors would in fact vanish as they also involve the
         mean curvature of M. Likewise, if the normal map representing V over M had zero average,

12One could imagine a more complicated argument where the manifold M is allowed to change with the radius, such
that these manifolds converge in some strong way as the radius goes to 0 to a manifold which is tangent. One could
then measure the frequency with respect to these changing manifolds. Such a problem does arise in Almgren’s original
work when trying to use a center manifold for all branch points, which in our language corresponds to including also
branch points of planar frequency < 2. We however do not need to do this, as the planar frequency allows us to
deal with such points using blow-ups relative to tangent planes as we saw in Section 3. In some sense, the need for
changing the center manifold at a given point is replaced by a much simpler situation where one changes the “center
manifold” at nearby points instead (i.e. we take the “center manifold” at points of planar frequency < 2 to be the
tangent plane at the point).
               BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                                 41

         then these terms would also vanish. It appears hard however to guarantee either of these
         situations, and thus for general M when this term does not vanish, we need to control it
         suitably in order to establish approximate monotonicity of the associated frequency function
         relative to M. In order to show the appropriate control, namely that this error is higher
         order (say, approximately cubic), M needs to somehow mirror (the average of) V ; for
         instance, at a point where V is close to a plane with some rate, M should be also. Whilst
         this ties in nicely to (C) above, it is crucial that everywhere M is a reflection of the decay
         rate of the varifold to its average, rather than just at a single point. This is important for
         certain estimates, which without one cannot control these linear error terms.
Typically in the literature the center manifold is described as being an “approximation to the
average of the sheets” of the varifold, with its use being to construct a blow-up which is non-
collapsed and thus has singularities; this is done by showing that the blow-up relative to the center
manifold has zero average, yet the full blow-up is non-zero (the latter being a result of having
a bounded frequency function with a monotonicity-type property). We stress that whilst this is
loosely the truth, the center manifold needs to be much more than just a manifold-approximation
to the average of the sheets in order for there to be an approximately monotone frequency function
with respect to it. Indeed, what is necessary is for the center manifold to be close to the average
whilst also mirroring the decay of the varifold towards its tangent plane(s), as described in (D) above.
This is much stronger than just being an approximation to the average, and this is consistent with
the center manifold needing to be an object which inherently has a variational structure built into it
in order for there to be an approximately monotone frequency function. Thus, “an approximation
to the average” is perhaps more accurately described as “an approximation to the average which
reflects the decay behaviour between the varifold and its average”. Again, the reason for this is
not to get a blow-up with zero average, but instead to show the approximate monotonicity of the
frequency relative to the center manifold at points of interest (indeed, in our approach, it is not the
fact that the average of the blow-up is zero which allows us to ultimately conclude our argument 13,
but only that the average of the graphical representation of the varifold over the center manifold is
suitably small in order to control the error terms needed to show the relevant frequency function is
approximately monotone). The size of the relevant singular set is then controlled by controlling an
appropriate subset of the touching set of V and the center manifold, in the same spirit as classical
quantitative unique continuation arguments. The average is a suitable candidate for building the
center manifold for another reason, namely because it is close to harmonic, and the error term in
this closeness is cubic in |Du| (which is the correct order we wanted to make these linear errors
involving the average). It is ultimately this fact that the error between the average and a harmonic
function is cubic which enables us to establish the regularity point from (A) above for our center
manifold.
Remark: In Almgren’s construction [Alm00] (and also in De Lellis–Spadaro [DLS16a]) the center
manifold construction is much more complicated than what we need here, as we only need the
center manifold to pass through points of planar frequency ≥ 2, which we will be able to guarantee.
If one tries to construct a center manifold which can be used for every branch point, it will not pass
through those branch points where the decay rate is < 2. (It also won’t necessarily pass through
density Q classical singularities, which one may think of as points with “frequency 1”).

13The average being zero is useful from the perspective of improved regularity, however. Indeed, knowing that you
have a non-trivial blow-up with zero average means that the blow-up cannot collapse into a single harmonic function
with multiplicity Q in the limit, and so it must ‘separate’. In principle, this separation then allows one to understand
further regularity structures for the varifold about branch points in an inductive fashion, using the reduction of
the multiplicity on the sheets of the blow-up. This is a key mechanism in the regularities theories first seen in
[Cha88, Wic14], for instance.
42              BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

Remark: It is perhaps instructive to consider how one establishes a dimension bound on flat
singular points which are not branch points, and why that case is significantly more simple. Indeed,
there the varifold is locally given by the sum of minimal graphs, and so one can reduce to bounding
the Hausdorff dimension of the touching set of two minimal graphs, say f and g, defined over
the (common) tangent plane. One can then look at the difference f − g, which solves an elliptic
PDE, for which one can use methods from [GL86] to establish directly a form of monotonicity of
a frequency function (this is also the philosophy taken by Simon and the third author in [SW16]).
Using elliptic estimates, the result then follows simply by blowing up. In the language of center
manifolds, one could view this argument in two ways. One could instead look at the two-valued
function Jf K + JgK and compare it to the average 21 (f + g) of the sheets, which would morally then
be looking at the two-valued symmetric function ± 12 Jf − gK; notice that this is then the same as
looking at the single-valued difference f − g. Alternatively, one could use the graph of g as the
“center manifold”, and measure the frequency of f relative to g; morally this would be looking at
f − g. However, even in this very simple situation the center manifold construction will not agree
with either of these “natural” choices, and as a result one has to deal with the extra linear error
term mentioned in (D). The center manifold is then built essentially to deal with this error term
when there is seemingly no other “natural” candidate for a manifold to measure frequency with
respect to. It would be interesting to investigate whether in some specialised situations, such as
area minimisers coming from calibrated submanifolds, one can find a more natural candidate, such
as another calibrated submanifold.

Remark 4.1. Loosely speaking, the center manifold can be described as follows: for each x ∈
B1n (0), let r(x) denote the largest radius σ > 0 such that both the height and tilt excess of V
relative to the tangent plane of ua at x fail to decay at a rate of 2 (or even 2 − δ for some small
δ > 0 fixed) in the cylinder Rk × Bσn (x); notice that r(x) = 0 if x is (the projection of) a flat
singular point of planar frequency ≥ 2. Then, the center manifold is morally the graph of

                                       ℘(x) := (ua ∗ ϱr(x) )(x)

where ϱ is a suitable radial bump function and ϱr(x) (y) := r(x)−n ϱ(y/r(x)); here, if r(x) = 0 we set
℘(x) := ua (x). Notice that such a function obeys the last three points above: provided r(x) is small
enough, ℘(x) is close to the average, which is almost harmonic, which would allow us to establish
(B). Point (C) is clear by definition. Finally, certainly this definition reflects the decay rate of V
to its average, so (D) holds. The regularity conclusion required in (A) is, however, unclear. In
our actual construction of a center manifold, we take a suitable discretisation of this definition,
which will enable us to show the regularity whilst also maintaining the other three conditions. We
also note that this heuristic definition also shows why one should expect Almgren’s observation
that when u is actually a single-valued function whose graph is minimal, then the center manifold
coincides with the graph of u and so provides an improved regularity estimate from C 1,α to C 3,β
(as in the single-valued case, the planar frequency is ≥ 2 everywhere, and so r(x) ≡ 0 for all x).

We begin by setting up the notation and assumptions we will need throughout this section.
Definition: Let us write
                                                Z
                                         1
                       Ê2V,P (Br (x)) := r−n               ∥πX − πP ∥2 d∥V ∥(X)
                                        2       Brn+k (x)

for the tilt-excess of V in the ball Br (x) with respect to the plane P passing through the origin,
and
                                    ÊV (Br (x)) := inf ÊV,P (Br (x))
                                                    P
              BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                          43

for the optimal tilt-excess of V on the ball Brn+k (x) over planes P through 0.
Definition: We write the height of V on a set A relative to a plane P by

                               hV,P (A) :=       sup         |πP ⊥ (x) − πP ⊥ (y)| .
                                             x,y∈spt∥V ∥∩A

For a ball B, we then set
                                          hV (B) := inf hV,P (B)
                                                       P ∈PB

where here PB is the set of all hyperplanes P attaining the infimum for ÊV (B). Throughout, we
will write PB for a choice of hyperplane in PB which achieves hV (B); in particular, this choice also
achieves the infimum in ÊV (B).
For a plane P and radius r > 0 we define the cylinder over P of radius r and center x by Cr (x, P ) :=
πP−1 (P ∩Brn+k (πP (x))). For cylinders we can similarly define a tilt-excess, except now ÊV (Cr (x, P ))
denotes ÊV,P (Cr (x, P )) ≡ Ê(ηx,r )# V,P and hV (Cr (x, P )) ≡ hV,P (Cr (x, P )), i.e. the plane in the tilt-
excess integrand is always taken to be the one defining the cylinder.
Recall that P0 := {0}k × Rn . Throughout this section we will assume the following:
Assumptions: Let ε2 ∈ (0, 1] be a constant to be specified, and let V be such that (η0,3√n )# V ∈ V.
We assume that
      • 0 is a branch point of V with ΘV (0) = Q and NV (0) ≥ 2;
           √        −1
      • ((6 n)n ωn ) ∥V ∥(B6n+k√ (0)) ≤ Q + ε2 ;
                                n

      • ÊV ≡ ÊV (B6n+k
                      √ (0)) = ÊV,P (B n+k
                       n            0
                                         √ (0)) ≤ ε2 .
                                       6 n

Note that, by working on a slightly smaller ball and rescaling, Remark 2.3 regarding the Poincaré
inequality means that we can also assume without loss of generality that the tilt-excess of V
relative to P0 controls the height excess of V relative to P0 . Moreover, from Theorem 2.2, if ε2 is
sufficiently small we may assume that V is represented by the graph of a generalised-C 1,α function
u : P0 ∩ B6n+k√ (0) → AQ (Rk ). The constant α = α(V) ∈ (0, 1) from Theorem 2.2 will be fixed
               n
throughout.

4.1. Construction of a center manifold. We break this down into several steps.
Step 1: Initial Set-Up and Discretisation. For j ∈ Z≥1 , write C j for the collection of (closed)
cubes L of P0 of the form

                                L = [a1 , a1 + 2ℓ] × · · · × [an , an + 2ℓ] ⊂ P0

where 2ℓ = 21−j =: 2ℓ(L) is the side-length of the cube L, ai ∈ 21−jSZ with ai ∈ [−4, 4 − 2ℓ]. The
center of L is xl := (a1 + ℓ, . . . , an + ℓ) ∈ Rn . We also write C := ∞    j
                                                                        j=1 C . If H, L ∈ C are such
that H ⊂ L, we call L an ancestor of H and H a descendant of L. If in addition ℓ(L) = 2ℓ(H), we
call H a child of L and L the parent of H. Furthermore, if L ∈ C j we say j is the level of L, and
write level(L) := j.
We now build a Whitney–style decomposition of [−4, 4]n which reflects the decay behaviour of V in
each region. Cubes will be chosen depending on the failure of decay of either the tilt-excess or the
height (in L∞ ) at suitable scales. We will have numerous choices in our construction, determined
by choices of constants. These constants are:
44                 BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

      (i) M0 ≥ 4, determining the scale of the balls determined by our Whitney-style decomposition,
          and thus how much overlap different balls have (thus M0 is a parameter determining the
          level of ‘discretisation’);
     (ii) N0 ≥ 1, determining how small the cubes we are looking at are by controlling the maximal
          cube size (morally, this gives an upper bound on the convolution scale by 2−N0 in Remark
          4.1, thus forcing a certain degree of closeness to the average);
     (iii) Ce ≥ 1 determining the failure of tilt-excess decay;
     (iv) Ch ≥ 1 determining the failure of L∞ height decay.
We will always be choosing M0 first depending on V (in particular, we take this to include the
dependence on n, k, Q, for simplicity), followed by N0 , then followed by Ce , then Ch , and finally
ε2 . In this ordering of constant choice, later constants are therefore allowed to depend on earlier
ones, e.g. Ce is allowed to depend on M0 and N0 , as in the end these will only depend on V. As an
initial requirement, we impose that M0 , N0 obey
                                              √
(4.1)                                     M0 n27−N0 ≤ 1.

For each L ∈ C, set pL ≡ (yL , xL ) := (u1 (xL ), xL ) for some choice of u1 (e.g. order the values of
u by the natural ordering of the function e1 · u : B1n (0) → AQ (R) and take the smallest one in
                                    √                    n+k
this ordering). Set rL := M0 nℓ(L) and BL := B64r          L
                                                             (pL ). Write PL := PBL for the choice of
plane which achieves the infimums in both ÊV (BL ) and hV (BL ), as defined above. We then define
families of cubes R, S ⊂ C, with S = Se ∪ Sh ∪ Sn , R = ∪j Rj , S⋆ = ∪j S⋆j for ⋆ ∈ {e, h, n}14, and
S j = Sej ∪ Shj ∪ Snj , as follows. For j < N0 we set Rj = S j = ∅. For j ≥ N0 , we proceed inductively.
If no ancestor of L ∈ C j is in S, then
                                                  1
 (EX) L ∈ Sej if ÊV (BL ) > Ce ÊV ℓ(L)1− 12 ;
 (HT) L ∈ Shj if L ̸∈ Sej and hV (BL ) > Ch ÊV ℓ(L);
 (NN) L ∈ Snj if L ̸∈ Sej ∪ Shj but L intersects an element of S j−1 .
If none of (EX), (HT), or (NN) occur, then L ∈ Rj . (Notice that we never consider L ∈ C j which
                                                                                             S has
an ancestor in S.) Finally, after the inductive construction is complete, set Γ := [−4, 4]n \ L∈S L.
                                                                   1
Remark 4.2. One might wonder why we chose a power of 1 − 12           in condition (EX), as opposed to
the (seemingly) more natural power of 1. It is actually very important that this power is < 1, with
the reason being because one cannot distinguish between regular points and singular points when
the power is 1 (naturally, smooth functions come into their tangent planes at a rate of at least 2
by Taylor’s theorem). As such we do not want to see failure of condition (EX) because the sheets
locally coincide, and the rate of decay to the tangent plane is exactly 2; morally at such points the
center manifold should just be the sheet itself, but this would not necessarily happen if (EX) failed
at such points15. This technicality manifests itself when we try to prove the doubling condition for
cubes in (EX) (see Lemma 4.19) analogously to what we did in Lemma 2.6, except now we will want
to control the whole energy by that of the average-free part. But one cannot do this if the sheets
all coincide, as the average-free part will vanish! And the issue is exactly because the average could
14This is a slight abuse of notation, as n does not denote a dimension here but rather indicates ‘neighbouring’ cubes.
15Compare this to the single-valued case. One would want to construct a center manifold which coincides with the
graph itself (indeed, it was already noted by Almgren that his construction achieves this). In this situation, (HT)
always fails. However, if the power in (EX) was 1, there could be points where (EX) holds – even though the graph
is smooth! To get around this, we decrease the power slightly, and this issue disappears.
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                   45

have decay rate exactly 2. The choice of power 11  12 is, however, essentially arbitrary: any power in
(2/3, 1) would suffice, and we choose 11/12 simply because it makes some of the constants nicer;
we will make it clear in our statements where this choice appears. The upper bound of 1 here is
exactly for the above reason, whilst the lower bound of 2/3 is the needed to prove that the center
manifold is C 3,β for some β > 0. As a final comment, one might think that if one takes an exponent
of 1 in (EX), one could rule out coincidence with a single-valued function in an alternative manner
by taking the constant Ce large enough (as a homogeneous degree 2 harmonic function with energy
1 at unit scale cannot have proportionally large energy at a smaller scale). However, the problem
is more a result of the relative change in the tilt-excess from one scale to the next, which is what
one needs for the doubling condition in Lemma 4.19 (which is unchanged by changing Ce ), rather
than the size of the constant.

Morally, at each stage condition (NN) forces all neighbouring cubes to those included at the previous
stage in S to “spawn” and be included in S; they might not lie in Snj (as they might lie in Sej or
Shj ), but they will lie in S j . It is this inductive spawning, combined with possibly smaller cubes
appearing from (EX) S   and (HT), which gives rise to S. The complement of this is then Γ. Note also
that for each j, Rj ∪ i≤j S i = [−4, 4]n .
Our first observation is that the pair (Γ, S) forms a (weak ) Whitney decomposition of [−4, 4]n , in
the sense that:
 (W1) Γ is closed, Γ ∪ L∈S L = [−4, 4]n , and Γ ∩ L = ∅ for all L ∈ S;
                        S

 (W2) if L1 , L2 ∈ S are distinct, then int(L1 ) ∩ int(L2 ) = ∅, where int(L) denotes the interior of
      the (closed) cube L;
 (W3) if L1 , L2 ∈ S have non-empty intersection, then |level(L1 ) − level(L2 )| ≤ 1; in particular,
      ℓ(L1 )/ℓ(L2 ) ∈ { 21 , 1, 2}.
We leave the reader to verify these simple properties. It can also be seen that (W1) – (W3) imply
that for every L ∈ S we have dist(Γ, L) ≥ 2ℓ(L) (we stress that here for two sets A, B ⊂ Rn we
define dist(A, B) := inf a∈A, b∈B |a − b|, which is different from the Hausdorff distance distH (A, B)).
However, we do not necessarily have any bound of the form dist(Γ, L) ≤ Cℓ(L) (such a bound
would mean that (Γ, S) is a Whitney decomposition of [−4, 4]n in the more traditional sense, hence
why we called the above a ‘weak’ Whitney decomposition).
Step 2: Initial Comparisons between Decay Regions. The decomposition (Γ, S) is the
decomposition we want which reflects the decay behaviour of V . Let us now prove some basic
properties regarding it.

Lemma 4.3. There exists ε = ε(V) ∈ (0, 1) and C ∗ = C ∗ (V, M0 , N0 ) ∈ (0, ∞) such that if ε2 < ε,
Ce ≥ C ∗ , and Ch ≥ C ∗ Ce , then S j = ∅ for all j ≤ N0 + 6.

Proof. The proof is simply playing around with the constants and inequalities in the definitions.
Fix N0 ≤ j ≤ N0 + 6, and take L ∈ C j . By (4.1), we know that rL ≤ 2−7 , and so 64rL ≤ 12 .
                                     √
Moreover, we know that |pL | ≤ 4 n + C ÊV from Theorem 2.2 (combined with the Poincaré
inequality to control the height excess by the tilt excess), where C = C(V). In particular, this
shows that for ε = ε(V) sufficiently small, we have BL ⊂ B5n+k
                                                             √ (0). Thus,
                                                              n

                                                    √ n
                                                  (6 n) 2             n+k
(4.2)              ÊV (BL ) ≤ ÊV,P0 (BL ) ≤      √ −N −6 n ÊV,P0 (B6 n (0)).
                                                                       √
                                              (64M0 n2    0 ) 2
46                 BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

Thus, as ℓ(L) ≥ 2−N0 −6 , for suitable C ∗ = C ∗ (n, k, M0 , N0 ), if Ce ≥ C ∗ this implies

                                             ÊV (BL ) ≤ Ce ÊV ℓ(L)

i.e. (EX) does not hold.

Now, as pL ∈ spt∥V ∥, we know (e.g. from the Lipschitz graph structure or the monotonicity
                              n , for some c = c (n). Thus, using again (4.2),
formula) that ∥V ∥(BL ) ≥ c0 rL             0   0
                                                              
                  ∥πPL − πP0 ∥ ≤ C0 ÊV,P0 (BL ) + ÊV,PL (BL ) ≤ 2C0 Ce ÊV ℓ(L)

where C0 = C0 (n, k, Q, M0 , N0 ). So, we have

 hV (BL ) ≤ C                                    e0 C0 Ce ÊV ℓ(L)2 + C
            e0 ℓ(L) · ∥πP − πP ∥ + hV,P (BL ) ≤ 2C                    e0 ℓ(L) · hV (Rk × B n√ (0))
                         L    0        0                                                  5 n

                                                      ≤ C̄0 (Ce + 1)ÊV · ℓ(L)

where Ce0 = Ce0 (n, k, Q, M0 , N0 ) and C̄0 = C̄0 (n, k, Q, M0 , N0 ). Thus, if C ∗ = C ∗ (n, k, Q, M0 , N0 ) is
chosen sufficiently large and Ch ≥ C ∗ Ce , then

                                             hV (BL ) ≤ Ch ÊV ℓ(L).

Thus, (HT) also fails for L. As this applies for every such L, this shows that S j = ∅ for every
j ≤ N0 + 6.                                                                                   □


Note: The same proof shows that, for any fixed K0 , we can ensure S j = ∅ for all j ≤ N0 + K0 ,
provided we allow C ∗ to depend on K0 also.

The next lemma gives comparisons between the planes PL realising ÊV (BL ) for different cubes
L ∈ R ∪ S. What this lemma is effectively doing is controlling the planes across neighbouring
cubes, which will allow us to “glue” the planes together when forming the center manifold to
establish its existence and regularity. It also says that V remains close to the relevant plane in the
relevant region.

Lemma 4.4. Let C ∗ = C ∗ (V, M0 , N0 ) ∈ (0, ∞) be as in Lemma 4.3. Then, there exists ε =
ε(V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ) ∈ (0, 1) such that if ε2 < ε, Ce ≥ C ∗ , and Ch ≥ C ∗ Ce , then:
                                 n+k
(4.3)                 BH ⊂ BL ⊂ B5√ n
                                      (0)          for any H, L ∈ R ∪ S with H ⊂ L.

Moreover, suppose H, L ∈ R ∪ S are such that either (a) H ⊂ L, or (b) H ∩ L ̸= ∅ and level(L) ≤
level(H) ≤ level(L) + 1. Then:
                                         1
      (i) ∥πPL − πPH ∥ ≤ C1 ÊV ℓ(L)1− 12 ;

     (ii) ∥πH − πP0 ∥ ≤ C1 ÊV ;

     (iii) hV (C32rH (pH , P0 )) ≤ C2 ÊV ℓ(H) and spt∥V ∥ ∩ C32rH (pH , P0 ) ⊂ BH ;

     (iv) hV (C32rL (pL , PH )) ≤ C2 ÊV ℓ(L) and spt∥V ∥ ∩ C32rL (pL , PH ) ⊂ BL .

Here, C1 = C1 (V, M0 , N0 , Ce ) and C2 = C2 (V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ).
              BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                       47

Proof. The proof is a bit long but is effectively bookkeeping. The idea is that, since our cube
refinement only stops when the decay condition stops, we still have control on each cube as they
become finer and finer.

Notice first that the second inclusion in (4.3) we have already shown in the proof of Lemma 4.3;
note that the same proof there works for any L ∈ R ∪ S. Notice also that the second claims in
(iii) and (iv), respectively, follow from the first claims in (iii) and (iv), respectively, by choosing
C2 ε2 < 1, i.e. ε2 = ε2 (C2 ) is sufficiently small. Thus, to prove (4.3) we only need to prove the first
inclusion in (4.3), and to prove (iii) and (iv) we just need to prove the first inequality of each.

Consider first situation (a), i.e. when H ⊂ L (this includes (4.3)). We start by proving claims (4.3),
(i), (ii), and (iii) by induction on the level of H (we will return to (iv) afterwards). The base case
is when level(H) = N0 ; this forces H = L and so level(L) = N0 also. In particular, as H = L, the
first inclusion in (4.3) is trivial, as is claim (i). To see (ii), as ℓ(H) = 2−N0 , the argument from
the proof of Lemma 4.3 will give that ∥πPH − πP0 ∥ ≤ C̄ ÊV for some C̄ = C̄(V, M0 , N0 , Ce ), which
proves (ii). For the first claim in (iii), notice that

                                      C32rH (pH , P0 ) ⊂ C5√n (0, P0 )
                          √                        √
(indeed, |xH | + 32rH ≤ 5 n holds because |xH | ≤ 4 n and rH ≤ 2−7 ). Thus, as by assumption
hV (C5√n (0, P0 )) ≤ C(V)ÊV , we have

             hV (C32rH (pH , P0 )) ≤ hV,P0 (C5√n (0, P0 )) ≤ C(V)ÊV = 2N0 C(V) · ÊV ℓ(H)

as ℓ(H) = 2−N0 . This proves (iii) when level(H) = N0 .

Thus, under the assumption of (a), we have verified (4.3) and (i) – (iii) when level(H) = N0 . Now
we move to the inductive step.

First consider (4.3). Notice again that when H = L, the first inclusion in (4.3) is trivial, and
so we may assume H ⊊ L. We can therefore find H ≡ H i ⊂ H i−1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ H j ≡ L such that
i > j and H k ∈ Rk for all k < i (we make no claim on whether H i ≡ H is in Ri or S i ). It
therefore suffices to show BH i ⊂ BH i−1 , as then we would be done by induction. By our inductive
assumption, we know
                  √     that (iii) holds for H i−1 , and thus |yH i − yH i−1 | ≤ C2 ÊV ℓ(H i−1 ). Since also
|xH i − xH i−1 | ≤ nℓ(H i−1 ), we see that
                                                     √
                                 |pH i − pH i−1 | ≤ ( n + C2 ÊV )ℓ(H i−1 ).
                                                                                                √
In particular, as ℓ(H i−1 ) = 2ℓ(H i ), if we choose ε2 small enough we get |pH i − pH i−1 | ≤ 3 nℓ(H i ).
Now, to show BH i ⊂ BH i−1 , we need

                                    64rH i + |pH i − pH i−1 | ≤ 64rH i−1 .

As ℓ(H i−1 ) = 2ℓ(H i ), it therefore suffices to have
                                 √            √                √
                             64M0 nℓ(H i ) + 3 nℓ(H i ) ≤ 128M0 nℓ(H i )

i.e. 64M0 + 3 ≤ 128M0 , which is clearly true as M0 ≥ 1. This therefore proves (4.3) by induction.

Now we prove (i); again the case H = L is trivial, and so we can assume H ⊊ L. Again, we may
find H ≡ H i ⊂ H i−1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ H j ≡ L such that i > j and H k ∈ Rk for all k < i (we make no claim
on whether H i ≡ H is in Ri or S i ). Then, for a ∈ {j + 1, . . . , i}, we know from the monotonicity
48               BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

formula that ∥V ∥(BH a ) ≥ c0 (64rH a )n for some c0 = c0 (n). Thus,

                                         4(64rH a )n  2                                   
                ∥πPH a − πPH a−1 ∥2 ≤                 ÊV,PH a (BH a ) + Ê2V,P a−1 (BH a ) .
                                         ∥V ∥(BH a )                           H



Now as ÊV,PH a (BH a ) = ÊV (BH a ) ≤ ÊV,PH a−1 (BH a ) by definition of PH a , and since BH a ⊂ BH a−1
by (4.3) (which we know is true by induction, assuming ε2 is sufficiently small) we see that

                                           8 · 2n 2                    2n+3 2
                  ∥πPH a − πPH a−1 ∥2 ≤          ÊV,P a−1 (BH a−1 ) =     Ê (B a−1 ).
                                             c0       H                 c0 V H
                                                                                 1
But as H a−1 ∈ Ra−1 , we know that ÊV (BH a−1 ) ≤ Ce ÊV ℓ(H a−1 )1− 12 . So, we get
                                               n+3 1/2
                                               2                            1
                         ∥πPH a − πPH a−1 ∥ ≤            Ce ÊV ℓ(H a−1 )1− 12 .
                                                 c0

Now using the triangle inequality, we see that
                             i                            n+3 1/2        i
                             X                            2                X              1
          ∥πPH − πPL ∥ ≤            ∥πPH a − πPH a−1 ∥ ≤            Ce ÊV   ℓ(H a−1 )1− 12 .
                                                            c0
                            a=j+1                                                    a=j+1

                                              P∞        11/12 )−a ≤ C(2−j )11/12 ≡ Cℓ(L)11/12 , we see that
But noting that this sum is bounded by            a=j (2

                                                                            1
                                      ∥πPH − πPL ∥ ≤ C̄1 ÊV ℓ(L)1− 12

where C̄1 = C̄1 (n, Ce ). This proves (i) in the case of (a).
To see (ii), this follows readily from (i). Indeed, take any L ∈ S N0 with H ⊂ L (note such L exists
by Lemma 4.3) and apply (i) to get, as ℓ(L) = 2−N0 ,
                                                                       1
                                    ∥πPH − πPL ∥ ≤ C̄1 ÊV · (21− 12 )−N0 .

But as (ii) also holds for L (this was the base case of the induction), we know ∥πPL − πP0 ∥ ≤ C̄ ÊV
for some C̄ = C̄(V, M0 , N0 , Ce ). The triangle inequality then gives

                                           ∥πPH − πP0 ∥ ≤ C1 ÊV

for some C1 = C1 (V, M0 , N0 , Ce ), which shows (ii).
Next we prove (iii); as already mentioned, we just need to prove the first claim of (iii). Suppose
level(H) = i + 1, and choose H i ⊃ H ≡ H i+1 with H i ∈ Ri . By induction, we know that (iii) holds
for H i , and so we know in particular that spt∥V ∥ ∩ C32rH i (pH i , P0 ) ⊂ BH i .
                                                            √
But we know by construction that |xH i+1 − xH i | ≤ 2 nℓ(H i+1 ) ≤ 2rH i+1 and rH i+1 = 12 rH i ,
meaning that |xH i+1 − xH i | + 32rH i+1 ≤ 17rH i . This gives

                      C32rH i+1 (pH i+1 , P0 ) ⊂ C17rH i (pH i , P0 ) ⊂ C32rH i (pH i , P0 ).

Hence we have

                hV (C32rH i+1 (pH i+1 , P0 )) ≤ hV (C32rH i (pH i , P0 ))
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                   49

                                          ≤ hV,P0 (BH i )
                                          ≤ hV (BH i ) + C(n, k)rH i ∥πPH i − πP0 ∥
                                          ≤ Ch ÊV ℓ(H i ) + C(V, M0 , N0 , Ce )ÊV ℓ(H i )
                                            1
                                          ≡ C2 ÊV ℓ(H i ) ≡ C2 ÊV ℓ(H i+1 ),
                                            2
where the first line follows from the inclusion of cylinders, the second line follows from the induction
hypothesis, the third is the triangle inequality, and the fourth follows from the fact that H i ∈ Ri
and so (HT) fails, as well as using (ii) (which is true inductively as shown). As ℓ(H i ) = 2ℓ(H i+1 ),
this completes the proof of (iii).

Thus, now we have completed the proof of (4.3), as well as that of (i), (ii), and (iii) in case (a). To
complete case (a), we just need to verify (iv).

To prove (iv) under assumption (a), we will work by induction on level(L) ∈ {N0 , N0 + 1, . . . }.
Consider the base case, so that L ∈ RN0 . We claim that

                              C32rL (pL , PH ) ∩ B6n+k
                                                    √ (0) ⊂ C √ (0, P0 ).
                                                     n       5 n

                                      √
To see this, recall that |pL | ≤ 4 n + C(V)ÊV and rL ≤ 2−7 , and so a simple computation shows
that this inclusion is valid provided ∥πPH − πP0 ∥ is sufficiently small, which is guaranteed by (ii) if
ε2 = ε2 (V, M0 , N0 , Ce ) is sufficiently small; this proves the claimed inclusion. But then this gives

                               spt∥V ∥ ∩ C32rL (pL , PH ) ⊂ C5√n (0, P0 ),

and hence

             hV (C32rL (pL , PH )) ≤ hV (C5√n (0, P0 )) + C(n)rL ∥πPH − πP0 ∥ ≤ C̄ ÊV ℓ(L)

where C̄ = C̄(V, M0 , N0 , Ce ); here we have used (ii), our a priori height bound (from Theorem
2.2 and the relevant Poincaré inequality to control the height excess by the tilt excess as already
explained there), and that ℓ(L) = 2−N0 . This proves the first claim of (iv) when level(L) = N0
(from which the second claim of (iv) follows by taking ε2 = ε2 (C̄) sufficiently small, as already
explained).

Now suppose by induction that we have established (iv) in case (a) when level(L) ∈ {N0 , N0 +
1, . . . , i}, and we wish to prove it for level(L) = i + 1. We may therefore choose Li ∈ Ri with
Li+1 ≡ L ⊂ Li . We claim:

                               C32rLi+1 (pLi+1 , PH ) ⊂ C32rLi (pLi , PH ).

This follows in essentially the same way as in the base case. Indeed, from (iii) we know |yLi+1 −yLi | ≤
           i                             √
 2 ÊV ℓ(L ), and so as |xLi+1 − xLi | ≤
C√                                         nℓ(Li ), provided ε2 is small enough, we get |pLi+1 − pLi | ≤
         i+1
3 nℓ(L ). To prove the inclusion, we need |pLi+1 − pLi | + 32rLi+1 ≤ 32rLi , which is true as
rLi = 2rLi+1 and M0 ≥ 1. But then by our induction assumption, we know that

                  spt∥V ∥ ∩ C32rLi+1 (pLi+1 , PH ) ⊂ spt∥V ∥ ∩ C32rLi (pLi , PH ) ⊂ BLi

and therefore

            hV (C32rLi+1 (pLi+1 , PH )) ≤ hV (BLi ) + C(n, k)rLi ∥πPLi − πPH ∥
50               BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS
                                                                                             1
                                       ≤ Ch ÊV ℓ(Li ) + C(V, M0 , N0 , Ce )ÊV · ℓ(Li )1+1− 12
                                       ≤ C2 ÊV ℓ(Li+1 ),

where in the second inequality we have used that Li ∈ Ri and so (HT) fails, as well as the fact
that H ⊂ Li and so (i) holds, as well as ℓ(Li ) = 2ℓ(Li+1 ); here, C2 = C2 (V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ). This
establishes the first claim in (iv) by induction (from which the second follows in the same manner
as before). This therefore completes the proof of (iv), and thus completes the proof of the lemma
under the assumption that (a) holds.
Now we turn our attention to the case where (b) holds. We only need to prove (i) and (iv), as (ii)
and (iii) follow from the case of (a).
                       e ∈ R such that if L ∈ RN0 then L
For (i), choose a cube L                               √ = L and otherwise L is the parent of L.
                                                        e                       e
Then, as we have argued before, we have |pLe − pL | ≤ 2 nℓ(L). Similarly, using that L and H are
                                √              e is the parent of L then |pH − p e | ≤ 6√nℓ(L) =
adjacent, we have |pH − pL | ≤ 3 nℓ(L). So if L                                    L
 √ e                                                  √ e
3 nℓ(L).   Notice that the same bound |pH − pLe | ≤ 3 nℓ(L)   is still true if L
                                                                               e = L. Thus, we see
that BH ∪ BL ⊂ BLe . Hence, arguing similarly to as we have before,
                                                              
(4.4)               ∥πPH − πPLe ∥ ≤ C(n) ÊV (BH ) + ÊV (BLe ) ≤ C(n)ÊV (BLe )

and similarly                                                 
                    ∥πPL − πPLe ∥ ≤ C(n) ÊV (BL ) + ÊV (BLe ) ≤ C(n)ÊV (BLe ).
Using the triangle inequality we therefore have

                                    ∥πPH − πPL ∥ ≤ C(n)ÊV (BLe ).
                                                                                                  1
Thus, if Le ̸= L, then L  e ∈ R and so (EX) fails for L,                                     e 1− 12
                                                        e meaning that ÊV (B e ) ≤ Ce ÊV ℓ(L)      ≤
                                                                               L
                1
             1− 12                                                               N
2Ce ÊV ℓ(L)       , and so the result follows. Otherwise, L = L, and then L ∈ R ; but then one can
                                                               e                  0

                            n+k
control ÊV (BLe ) by ÊV (B5√ n
                                 (0)) up to constants depending on N0 (using (4.3)), and so the result
follows. Thus, (i) is established.
Finally, we come to (iv) in the case of (b). In fact, we claim that the conclusion holds not only for
L but also for any ancestor Le of L. We prove this by induction on the level of L, and for a given
level we work inductively on the level of the ancestor. Indeed, one sees that the argument under the
assumption of (a) goes through in this case, except at the end when one must apply (i) to bound
∥πPLe − πPH ∥, where Le ∈ R is an ancestor of L. However, one does have the desired bound in this
case, namely that as in (i), because one can verify (4.4) analogously (by induction on the level)
for all ancestors L
                  e of L in the present case. Hence the argument passes through in an analogous
manner, giving the result.                                                                         □

We may now prove from relatively simple parts of the above lemmas that both the tilt-excess and
height remain controlled on all the balls BL , for L ∈ R ∪ S. This is perhaps expected since as soon
as either decay condition fails we stop refining the cube.

Lemma 4.5. Let C ∗ be as in Lemma 4.3 and Ce ≥ C ∗ , Ch ≥ C ∗ Ce . Then, for sufficiently small
ε2 = ε2 (V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ) ∈ (0, 1) we have for any L ∈ R ∪ S,
                                                 1
                       ÊV (BL ) ≤ C ÊV ℓ(L)1− 12   and    hV (BL ) ≤ C ÊV ℓ(L).
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                          51

Here, C = C(V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ) ∈ (0, ∞).

Proof. The claim for L ∈ R follows from the construction, namely because (EX) and (HT) fail. So
we only need to prove the claim for L ∈ S. From Lemma 4.3 we know level(L) ≥ N0 + 7, and so it
has a parent L̃ ∈ R. But by (4.3) from Lemma 4.4 we know BL ⊂ BL̃ , and so
                                                                    n           
           ÊV (BL ) ≤ 2n/2 ÊV (BL̃ ) ≤ 2n/2 · Ce ÊV ℓ(L̃)11/12 = 2 2 +11/12 Ce ÊV ℓ(L)11/12

which shows the first claim. For the second, we have from Lemma 4.4(a)(i),

                          hV (BL ) ≤ hV (BL̃ ) + C(n, k)rL ∥πPL − πPL̃ ∥
                                    ≤ Ch ÊV ℓ(L̃) + C(n, k)rL · C1 ÊV ℓ(L̃)11/12
                                    ≤ C(V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ) · ÊV ℓ(L)

using ℓ(L̃) = 2ℓ(L); this proves the claim.                                                                 □

Step 3: Graphical Representation in Decay Regions and Regularity Estimates. Since
we have control over the tilt-excess and the height over cubes in our Whitney-style decomposition,
for suitable choices of parameter we will be able to apply our ε-regularity theorem (Theorem 2.2)
to deduce a certain graphical representation holds over the cube regions, with estimates reflecting
the decay of V on the given cube to a plane. We will then use these graphs to construct the center
manifold. In fact, we also prove more to allow us to compare the graphs over neighbouring cubes.

Lemma 4.6. Let C ∗ be as in Lemma 4.3 and Ce ≥ C ∗ , Ch ≥ C ∗ Ce . Then, for sufficiently small
ε2 = ε2 (V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ) ∈ (0, 1), the following holds. Let H, L ∈ R ∪ S be such that either:
   (a) H ⊂ L; or
   (b) H ∩ L ̸= ∅ and level(L) ≤ level(H) ≤ level(L) + 1.
Then, V C32rL (pL , PH ) satisfies the assumptions (suitably rescaled) of Theorem 2.2 in the cylinder
C32rL (pL , PH ).

Proof. From Lemma 4.4(iv) we know that in either case

                                      spt∥V ∥ ∩ C32rL (pL , PH ) ⊂ BL

(moreover from (4.3) we know that BL ⊂ B5n+k
                                          √ (0)). Moreover, as by assumption V is represented
                                           n
by a multi-valued graph over B6n√n (0) in Rk × B6n√n (0), with Lipschitz constant ≤ C(V)ÊV (by
Theorem 2.2), Lemma 4.4(ii) tells us that V C32rL (pL , PH ) is still a Q-valued Lipschitz graph over
PH with Lipschitz constant controlled by C1 ÊV , where C1 = C1 (V, M0 , N0 , Ce ). In particular, the
mass assumption in Theorem 2.2 holds for V C32rL (pL , PH ). But then from Lemma 4.4(iv) we
know

       Ê2V (C32rL (pL , PH )) ≤ 2n Ê2V,PH (BL )
                              ≤ 2n+1 Ê2V (BL ) + 2n+1 · (Q + 1)ωn ∥πPH − πPL ∥2
                                                         1                                            1
                              ≤ 2n+1 · C 2 Ê2V ℓ(L)2(1− 12 ) + 2n+1 · (Q + 1)ωn · C12 Ê2V ℓ(L)2(1− 12 )
52                BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

where in the last inequality we have used Lemma 4.5 and Lemma 4.4(i). To summarise, we have
                                                                         1
                                  ÊV (C32rL (pL , PH )) ≤ C̃ ÊV ℓ(L)1− 12

where C̃ = C̃(V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ) ∈ (0, ∞). Thus, if ε2 = ε2 (V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ) is such that C̃ε2 < ε,
where ε = ε(V) is as in Theorem 2.2, we see that Theorem 2.2 is applicable here.                            □

From Lemma 4.6 we therefore see that one can control V in the relevant regions by the size
of the cube of interest. Thus, for cubes H, L as in Lemma 4.6, we may apply Theorem 2.2 to
V C32rL (pL , PH ) to find a function uHL : B16rL (pL , PH ) → AQ (PH⊥ ) which is GC 1,α and obeys:
     (I) V    C16rL (pL , PH ) = v(uHL );
                                                                  1
     (II) ∥uHL ∥C 0 ≤ C                              e ÊV ℓ(L)1− 12
                      e ÊV ℓ(L) and ∥DuHL ∥GC 0,α ≤ C

where Ce = eC(V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ). Indeed, the bounds in (II) come from the bounds on the tilt-
excess and height on the relevant balls provided by Lemma 4.5, using also that pL ∈ spt∥V ∥ as well
as Lemma 4.4(iv) so that we know spt∥V ∥ ∩ C32rL (pL , PH ) ⊂ BL (conclusion (I) above also uses
this).
These functions will form the building blocks of our center manifold construction as well as for the
comparison between V and the center manifold. We call uHL the (H, L)-representation of V .
We now begin building the center Rmanifold from these building blocks. First, fix ϱ ∈ Cc∞ (B1n (0)) a
non-negative radial function with Rn ϱ = 1. For λ > 0, we write ϱλ (x) := λ−n ϱ(x/λ).
For each H, L ∈ R ∪ S as in Lemma 4.6, given the corresponding (H, L)-representation uHL of V ,
write
                                   hHL := (uHL )a ∗ ϱℓ(L)
for the smoothed average, i.e. we convolute by an amount proportional to the side-length of the cube
the function was constructed relative to (cf. Remark 4.1). We call hHL the tilted (H, L)-convoluted
average (“tilted” because it is defined over a subset of PH , not of P0 ).
Now, as the Lipschitz constant of hHL is bounded by C̃ ÊV ℓ(L) (from Lemma 4.6), and more-
over since ∥πPH − πP0 ∥ ≤ C1 ÊV (from Lemma 4.4(ii)), we may find a (smooth) function gHL :
  n (x , P ) → Rk such that
B8rL   L   0


                           graph(gHL ) = graph(hHL ) ∩ (Rk × B8r
                                                              n
                                                                L
                                                                  (pL , PH )).

We call gHL the (H, L)-convoluted average.
Remark: In the special case H = L, we will call uL ≡ uLL the L-representation of V , hL ≡ hLL
the tilted L-convoluted average, and gL ≡ gLL the L-convoluted average.
It is the functions gL which we will glue together to form the center manifold. In order to deduce
(1) the relevant regularity of the gluing; and (2) that the center manifold is close to the average of
V in a very strong way, we will prove some estimates regarding the gHL . The key fact for all this is
that a multi-valued minimal graph representing a stationary integral varifold close to a plane has
an average which is close to being harmonic, where the error term is cubic (it is this cubic nature
of the error which will give us the correct estimates for both (1) and (2) here). More precisely:

Lemma 4.7. Let C ∗ be as in Lemma 4.3 and Ce ≥ C ∗ , Ch ≥ C ∗ Ce . Assume also that ε2 =
ε2 (V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ) is small enough so that the conclusions of Lemmas 4.4, 4.5, 4.6 hold. Let
              BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                      53

H, L ∈ R ∪ S be as in Lemma 4.6. Then,
                          Z
                                                     3(1− 1 )
                             D(uHL )a · Dζ ≤ C Ê3V rL 12 ∥Dζ∥L1

for all ζ ∈ Cc∞ (B16rL (pL , PH ); PH⊥ ); here C = C(V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ).


Proof. Fix ζ ∈ Cc∞ (B16rL (pL , PH ); PH⊥ ). Extend ζ vertically to a function ζ̃ via ζ̃(ỹ, x̃) := ζ̃(x̃),
where ỹ ∈ PH⊥ and x̃ ∈ pL + PH . Then, take ζ̄ to be any function Cc1 (Rn+k ; PH⊥ ) which agrees
with ζ̃ in a neighbourhood of spt∥V ∥. Then, if we take the vector field χ = ζ̄ in the first variation
formula for V , we get (using the area formula)

                           XZ                             XZ
                                  DujHL · Dζ     ≤C                |DujHL · Dζ||DuHL |2 .
                            j                               j

Estimating the integral on the right-hand side, we have
                        Z                                                                 Z
                                                                                      3
                           D(uHL )a · Dζ ≤ C       sup                      |DuHL |           |Dζ|
                                                          B16rL (pL ,PH )

                                                 ≤ C Ê3V ℓ(L)11/4 ∥Dζ∥L1
                                                                11/4
                                                 ≡ C Ê3V rL           ∥Dζ∥L1

where here C = C(V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ); in the second inequality here we used the pointwise bound
on |DuHL | provided by the application of Theorem 2.2 enabled by Lemma 4.6.                      □


The simple estimate in Lemma 4.7 will be crucial for numerous reasons. First, we use it to show
that the functions hHL stay close to the original average (uHL )a in a very strong sense, with a
better estimate than one might a priori expect. This will be crucial for controlling the “bad” error
terms later.

Lemma 4.8. Assume the assumptions and set-up of Lemma 4.7. Then,
                                                                                       1
                                                                                n+3(1− 12 )+1
                         ∥hHL − (uHL )a ∥L1 (B15r (pL ,PH )) ≤ C Ê3V rL                             ,
                                                      L


where C = C(V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ).


Proof. This is a simple fact regarding convolutions using the estimate in Lemma 4.7. For simplicity,
let us write h ≡ hHL , u ≡ uHL , and ℓ = ℓ(L). Then
                                  Z
                  h(x) − ua (x) = ϱℓ (y)(ua (x − y) − ua (x)) dy
                                  Z       Z 1                        
                                = ϱℓ (y)       Dua (x − σy) · (−y) dσ dy
                                                  0
                                      Z Z 1
                                                                              −y
                                  =           ϱℓ (y/σ)Dua (x − y) ·                dσdy
                                         0                                   σ n+1
54              BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS
                                       Z                     Z 1                  
                                                                            −n−1
                                   =       Dua (x − y) · (−y)     ϱℓ (y/σ)σ      dσ dy.
                                                               0
                                                        |             {z           }
                                                                                 =: Γ(y)

But note that if we set                   Z ∞ Z 1         
                                                       yτ
                                  ζ(y) :=      τ   ϱℓ        σ −n−1 dσdτ
                                           |y|   0    |y|σ
then, because ϱℓ is radial, we have Dζ = Γ. As ϱ has compact support we know that ζ has compact
support, and moreover that spt(ζ) ⊂ Bℓ (0). Note however that, whilst Γ is smooth on Rn \ {0},
it is unbounded on any neighbourhood of 0 (as n > 1), and so ζ is not C 1 . We will instead show
that ζ ∈ W 1,1 ; this is enough for its applicability in Lemma 4.7 by an approximation argument.
So, notice that                           Z ∞ Z 1  
                                                        yt
                              ζ(y) = |y|2
                                              t     ϱℓ      σ −n−1 dσdt
                                           1     0       σ
and hence
                                   Z Z ∞Z 1               
                                                yt −n −n−1
                                                       2
                      ∥ζ∥L1 ≤           t|y| ϱ       ℓ σ      dσdtdy
                                 1   0          ℓσ
                                Z              Z 1      Z ∞         
                              2       2                           −n−1
                            =ℓ     |u| ϱ(u)du         σdσ        t     dt
                                                                      0              1
                                 ≡ Cℓ2 < ∞

and
                          Z Z 1          y                                   Z                Z 1        
     ∥Dζ∥L1 = ∥Γ∥L1 ≤             |y|ϱ           ℓ−n σ −n−1 dσdy = ℓ                |y|ϱ(y)dy            dσ       ≡ Cℓ < ∞
                             0             ℓσ                                                       0

which shows ζ ∈ W 1,1 . Thus, we have
                              Z                       Z
              h(x) − ua (x) = Dua (x − y) · Dζ(y) dy = Dua (y) · Dζ(x − y) dy

and thus, using Lemma 4.7,
                                                  Z                       Z
              ∥h − ua ∥L1 (B15r (pL ,PH ) =                                   Dua (y) · Dζ(x − y) dy dx
                                  L
                                                    B15rL (pL ,PH )
                                                                  Z                  Z
                                                          11/4
                                                ≤ C Ê3V rL                                |Dζ(x − y)| dydx
                                                                   B15rL (pL ,PH )
                                                           11/4
                                                ≤ C Ê3V rL              n
                                                                  · C(n)rL · ∥Dζ∥L1
                                                           n+15/4
                                                ≡ C Ê3V rL

as desired.                                                                                                                  □

The L1 estimate in Lemma 4.8 will be used in two crucial ways. One, as already mentioned, is to
control the “bad” error terms in the frequency computations later. Another way is to prove C 3,β -
estimates for the functions hHL , gHL , for different H, L when the domains overlap. This is done
via certain interior Schauder estimates in the following lemma. We begin by comparing functions
defined on subsets of the same plane.
               BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                      55

Lemma 4.9. Assume the assumptions and set-up of Lemma 4.7. Then, for each j ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3},
                                                                                             1
          ∥hHL − hH ∥C j (B6r (pH ,PH )) + ∥gHL − gH ∥C j (B4r (pH ,P0 )) ≤ C Ê3V ℓ(L)3(1− 12 )+1−j ,
                                H                                  H


where C = C(V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ). Moreover, for any β ∈ (0, 3/4)
                                                                                                 1
        ∥hHL − hH ∥C 3,β (B6r (pH ,PH )) + ∥gHL − gH ∥C 3,β (B4r (pH ,P0 )) ≤ Cβ Ê3V ℓ(L)3(1− 12 )−2−β
                               H                                    H


where Cβ = Cβ (V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch , β).

Remark: Notice that√hHL is defined on B16rL (pL , PH ) and hH is defined on B16rH (pH , PH ), and
so since |pL − pH | ≤ 2 nℓ(L) both these domains contain B6rH (pH , PH ).
                                              1
Note: The range of β is (0, 3/4) ≡ (0, 3(1 − 12 ) − 2); this indicates the dependence of β on the
choice of exponent in (EX), and why it needs to be > 2/3.

Proof. We have H ∈ Rj ∪ S j and L is either (a) an ancestor of H, or (b) H ∩ L ̸= ∅ with16
level(L) − level(H) ∈ {0, 1}. Consider also another cube, J, where in the case of (a) J is the parent
of L and in the case of (b) J is the parent of H.
We start by comparing hHL and hHJ ; the general case will follow by iteration and the triangle
inequality. Notice that, where defined, the only difference between hHL and hHJ is the scaling of
the convolution factor (this is simply because the average-part of uHL and uHJ coincide, since both
functions coincide with V on their domains of definition). So, in fact, where both are defined,

                                    hHL − hHJ = (uHL )a ∗ (ϱℓ(L) − ϱℓ(J) ).

Fix any ζ ∈ Cc∞ (B9rL (pL , PH )). Notice that

          spt(ζ ∗ ϱℓ(L) ), spt(ζ ∗ ϱℓ(J) ) ⊂ B9rL +rJ (pL , PH ) ⊂ B11rL (pL , PH ) ⊂ B16rJ (pJ , PH )

which guarantees the applicability of Lemma 4.7 with both ζ ∗ ϱℓ(L) and ζ ∗ ϱℓ(J) in place of ζ.
Again, on spt(ζ) we have (uHL )a = (uHJ )a . So,
     Z                        Z                        Z
        ζ · ∆(hHL − hHJ ) = − D(hHL − hHJ ) · Dζ = − D(uHL )a · D(ζ ∗ (ϱℓ(L) − ϱℓ(J) ))

and so applying Lemma 4.7 we see (noting ℓ(J)/ℓ(L) ∈ {1, 2})
                  Z
                                                11/4
                    ζ · ∆(hHL − hHJ ) ≤ C Ê3V rL ∥D(ζ ∗ (ϱℓ(L) − ϱℓ(J) ))∥L1 .

So, bounding

        ∥D(ζ ∗ (ϱℓ(L) − ϱℓ(J) ))∥L1 = ∥ζ ∗ (Dϱℓ(L) − Dϱℓ(J) )∥L1 ≤ ∥ζ∥|L1 ∥Dϱℓ(L) − Dϱℓ(J) ∥L1
                                                                         ≤ Cℓ(L)−1 ∥ζ∥L1 .

Combining the above inequalities, we get
                            Z
                                                           7/4
                               ζ · ∆(hHL − hHJ ) ≤ C Ê3V rL ∥ζ∥L1 .

16In fact, going forward we will only need the case of (b) where level(L) = level(H).
56               BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

As this is true for all ζ ∈ Cc∞ (B9rL (pL , PH )), this immediately gives
                                                                                       7/4
                             ∥∆(hHL − hHJ )∥C 0 (B9r (pL ,PH )) ≤ C Ê3V rL .
                                                               L


Notice also that an identical argument gives for any k ≥ 0 (simply integrating by parts to move
the extra derivatives on the ϱℓ(L) and ϱℓ(J) terms, which ultimately gives an extra factor of ℓ(L)−k
in the bound)              Z
                                                                             7/4−k
                                ζ · ∆(Dk (hHL − hHJ )) ≤ C Ê3V rL                     ∥ζ∥L1

and thus
                                                                                            7/4−k
                         ∥∆(Dk (hHL − hHJ ))∥C 0 (B9r (pL ,PH )) ≤ C Ê3V rL                        .
                                                                   L

Also, from Lemma 4.8 and the fact that (uHL )a = (uHJ )a on B9rL (pL , PH ), we immediately get
from the triangle inequality
                                                                                n+15/4
                             ∥hHL − hHJ ∥L1 (B9r (pL ,PH )) ≤ C Ê3V rL                         .
                                                          L


To summarise, setting for ease of notation ξ := hHL − hHJ , we currently have estimates
                                                                          n+15/4
                                      ∥ξ∥L1 (B9r (pL ,PH )) ≤ C Ê3V rL
                                                 L


and for each k ≥ 0,
                                                                               7/4−k
                                ∥∆(Dk ξ)∥C 0 (B9r (pL ,PH )) ≤ C Ê3V rL                .
                                                      L

In particular, we have for any distinct x, y ∈ B9rL (pL , PH ) and β ∈ (0, 3/4),

                |∆(Dk ξ)(x) − ∆(Dk ξ)(y)|   |∆(Dk ξ)(x) − ∆(Dk ξ)(y)|
                                          =                           · |x − y|1−β
                         |x − y|β                    |x − y|
                                                                                            1−β
                                                  ≤ 181−β ∥∆(Dk+1 ξ)∥C 0 (B9r (pL ,PH )) · rL
                                                                                        L
                                                          1−β
                                                  ≤ 18          · C Ê3V r7/4−k−β .

Hence,
                                                                             7/4−k−β
                              [∆(Dk ξ)]C 0,β (B9r (pL ,PH )) ≤ C Ê3V rL                    .
                                                      L

Using these bounds, the interior C 2,β Schauder estimates give (applied with the operator ∆ and
the L1 norm on the right-hand side of the Schauder estimate)
                                                                15/4−k
                      ∥ξ∥C k (B17r /2 (pL ,PL )) ≤ C Ê3V rL                for k ∈ {0, 1, 2}.
                                  L


In turn, using this supremum bound for Dξ as well as the previous supremum bound on ∆(Dξ),
applying the interior Schauder estimates again but now to Dξ, we get
                                                              15/4−k
                       ∥ξ∥C k (B8r (pL ,PH )) ≤ C Ê3V rL                 for k ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}
                                  L


and
                                                                           3/4−β
                                      ∥ξ∥C 3,β (B8r (pL ,PH )) ≤ C Ê3V rL         .
                                                  L

This proves the desired estimates, except that for hHL − hHJ .
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                     57

We now deduce the general form of the first estimate in both claims of the lemma by iterating
the above estimates. We split into the two different cases. Suppose first that H ∩ L ̸= ∅ and
level(L) − level(H) ∈ {0, 1}. Then, let J be the parent of H. The above argument allows us to
bound hHL − hHJ . But it also allows us to bound hH − hHJ (if we apply it with L = H); the
triangle inequality then gives
                         √     the desired bounds on hHL − hH , since B6rH (pH , PH ) ⊂ B8rL (pL , PH )
(again, as |pH − pL | ≤ 2 nℓ(L)).
In the second case, we have that L is an ancestor of H. So take a chain H ≡ Lj ⊂ Lj−1 ⊂
· · · ⊂ Li ≡ L, where Lk ∈ Rk ∪ S k for all k. By the above (with Lk in place of L and Lk−1
in place of J) we know how to bound hHLk − hHLk−1 on the ball B8rLk (pLk , PH ). But we know
B6rH (pH , PH ) ⊂ B8rLk (pLk , PH ) for all such k, and so we may bound

                                                      j
                                                      X
              ∥hH − hHL ∥C 3,β (B6r (pH ,PH )) ≤               ∥hHLk − hHLk−1 ∥C 3,β (B6r (pH ,PH ))
                                       H                                                  H
                                                     k=i+1
                                                               j
                                                               X
                                                  ≤ C Ê3V           (23/4−β )−k
                                                               k=i+1

                                                  ≤ C Ê3V ℓ(L)3/4−β

which proves the first bound in the second claimed estimate of the lemma. The first bound in
first claimed estimate of the lemma follows in an analogous fashion. This proves all the desired
estimates on hHL − hH . The corresponding estimates for gHL − gH then follow by simple facts
regarding changing coordinates (see [DLS16a, Lemma B.1] for a precise statement).              □

Whilst Lemma 4.9 controlled convoluted averages which are defined on the same plane, we also
need to compare the convoluted averages which are defined on planes corresponding to adjacent
cubes. This is needed to understand the regularity of the center manifold when we move from
cube-to-cube. This is achieved in the following lemma.

Lemma 4.10. Assume the assumptions and set-up of Lemma 4.7, except those on H, L. Fix cubes
H, L ∈ R ∪ S and suppose that H has an ancestor J (which we allow to be H itself ) such that
J ∩ L ̸= ∅ and level(J) = level(L). Then, there is a map ĥL : B8rJ (pJ , PH ) → PH⊥ such that:

   (a) graph(ĥL ) = graph(hL ) ∩ C8rJ (pJ , PH );
                                                                 1
   (b) ∥hHJ − ĥL ∥L1 (B8r (pJ ,PH )) ≤ C Ê3V ℓ(J)n+3(1− 12 )+1 .
                           J

Here C = C(V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ).

Proof. Note first from Lemma 4.4 that

                    ∥πPH − πPL ∥ ≤ ∥πPH − πPJ ∥ + ∥πPJ − πPL ∥ ≤ 2C1 ÊV ℓ(J)11/12 .

Note also that, by Lemma 4.8,
                                                                                n+15/4
                               ∥hHJ − (uHJ )a ∥L1 (B15r (pJ ,PH )) ≤ C Ê3V rJ
                                                           J


and (as rL = rJ )
                                                                             n+15/4
                                ∥hL − (uL )a ∥L1 (B15r (pL ,PL )) ≤ C Ê3V rJ         .
                                                       J
58                 BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

We may find functions ĥL , û : B8rJ (pJ , PH ) → PH⊥ such that graph(ĥL ) = graph(hL ) ∩ C8rJ (pJ , PH )
and graph(û) = graph((uL )a ) ∩ C8rJ (pJ , PH ), and moreover from the above L1 bound (using
[DLS16a, Lemma B.1]),
                                                                        n+15/4
                                 ∥ĥL − û∥L1 (B8r (pJ ,PH )) ≤ C Ê3V rJ      .
                                                          J

Thus by the triangle inequality, writing B = B8rJ (pJ , PH ) for notational simplicity,

            ∥hHJ − ĥL ∥L1 (B) ≤ ∥hHJ − (uHJ )a ∥L1 (B) + ∥(uHJ )a − û∥L1 (B) + ∥û − ĥL ∥L1 (B)
                                            n+15/4
                                  ≤ C Ê3V rJ         + ∥(uHJ )a − û∥L1 (B)

and so it suffices to estimate ∥(uHJ )a − û∥L1 (B) . This follows again from simple facts regarding
changing coordinates (indeed, one can write down an expression for û in terms of (uL )a , the inverse
of the map x 7→ x + (uL )a (x), and the projection maps to the planes in question). We refer the
reader to [DLS16a, Lemma 5.6] for the details.                                                      □


Step 4: Gluing and completion of the construction. We are now in a position to prove the
main estimates on the convoluted averages gH in order to glue them together to form the center
manifold. First, we introduce some further notation which we will need for this. For each j set
                                                                   j
                                                                   [
                                                  j            j
                                                P := R ∪                  S i.
                                                                   i=N0
                                 17 17 n
We also fix a function ϑ ∈ Cc∞ ( − 16                                     n
                                                1]) with ϑ ≡ 1 on [−1, 1] and |Dϑ| ≤ C(n). For
                                      , 16 ; [0,
                                                 y−xL
a cube L ∈ R ∪ S we set ϑL (y) := ϑ               ℓ(L)        . We then define the glued interpolation at step j,
℘j : [−4, 4]n → Rk , by                              P
                                                       L∈P j ϑL gL
                                                ℘j := P            .
                                                        L∈P j ϑL

We will show that the ℘j converge (in C 3 ) to a function ℘, the graph of which will be our center
manifold. First, we need some final estimates relating the gH to one another and to ℘j .

Lemma 4.11. Assume the assumptions and set-up of Lemma 4.7, except those on H, L. Then for
any H, L ∈ P j we have:

      (i) For any β ∈ (0, 3/4), ∥gH ∥C 3,β (B4r (xH ,P0 )) ≤ Cβ ÊV ;
                                                   H

                                                                                     1
     (ii) If H ∩ L ̸= ∅, then ∥gH − gL ∥C j (Br (xH )) ≤ Cβ ÊV ℓ(H)3(1− 12 )+1−j−β for any j ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}
                                               H
          and β ∈ (0, 3/4);
                                                                                            1
     (iii) For any β ∈ (0, 3/4), |D3 gH (xH ) − D3 gL (xL )| ≤ Cβ ÊV |xH − xL |3(1− 12 )−2−β ;

     (iv) ∥gH − yH ∥C 0 (B4r (xH ,P0 )) ≤ C ÊV ℓ(H) and, if PxgH is the tangent plane to graph(gH ) at x,
                            H
                                                      1
          then ∥πPH − π    g
                          Px H   ∥ ≤ C ÊV ℓ(H)1− 12 for all x ∈ H;

     (v) If L̃ is the cube concentric to L ∈ S j with ℓ(L̃) = 89 ℓ(L), then for all i ≥ j,
                                                                                 1
                                     ∥℘i − gL ∥L1 (L̃) ≤ C Ê3V ℓ(L)n+3(1− 12 )+1 .
              BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                            59

Here, C is a constant depending on V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch , and Cβ is a constant allowed to also depend
on β.


Proof. Claim (i) follows immediately from Lemma 4.9: simply take LN0 ∈ RN0 to be an ancestor
of H in Lemma 4.9 and use the triangle inequality, since the estimates on ∥gHLN0 ∥C 3,β follow
immediately from those on hHLN0 (which in turn follow from Lemma 4.9 using estimates for uHLN0
which follow from the discussion after Lemma 4.6).
Regarding (ii), fix H, L such that H ∩ L ̸= ∅. From our construction of R ∪ S, this means that we
either have ℓ(H) = ℓ(L) or (without loss of generality by swapping H and L) ℓ(H) = 12 ℓ(L). We
claim that in either case we have

(4.5)                         ∥hH − ĥL ∥L1 (B2r (pH ,PH )) ≤ C Ê3V ℓ(H)n+15/4 .
                                                H


Indeed, in the case ℓ(H) = ℓ(L), we can just apply Lemma 4.10 (take J = H) to get this (in fact,
we get control on the L1 norm on the larger set B8rH (pH , PH )). In the case ℓ(H) = 12 ℓ(L), let J
be the parent of H; obviously J ∩ L ̸= ∅. So apply Lemma 4.10 to get ∥hHJ − ĥL ∥L1 (B8r (pJ ,PH )) ≤
                                                                                                      J
C Ê3V ℓ(J)n+15/4 . But from Lemma 4.9 we know ∥hH − hHJ ∥L1 (B6r (pH ,PH )) ≤ C Ê3V ℓ(J)n+15/4 , and
                                                                            H
so from the triangle inequality we get ∥hH − ĥL ∥L1 (B2r (pH ,PH )) ≤ C Ê3V ℓ(H)n+15/4 , giving (4.5).
                                                         H
Thus, (4.5) is established. But this estimate then passes to gH − gL on a smaller ball by changing
coordinates (see [DLS16a, Lemma B.1]), giving

                             ∥gH − gL ∥L1 (B3r /2 (pH ,P0 )) ≤ C Ê3V ℓ(H)n+15/4 .
                                               H


Finally, since we know ∥gH −gL ∥C 3,β (B3r /2 (pH ,P0 )) ≤ Cβ ÊV from (i), we can apply the interpolation
                                          H
inequalities for Hölder spaces (or interior Schauder estimates) to get (ii).
For (iii), notice that if we applied the argument for (ii) instead assuming that L is the parent of
H, we would deduce that for any 0 < γ < β < 3/4 we have

                              [D3 gH − D3 gL ]γ,BrH (xH ) ≤ Cβ,γ ÊV ℓ(H)β−γ .

Hence (taking e.g. γ = β/2)

        |D3 gH (xH ) − D3 gL (xL )| ≤ |D3 gH (xH ) − D3 gH (xL )| + |D3 gH (xL ) − D3 gL (xL )|
                                    ≤ ℓ(H)γ [D3 gH − D3 gL ]γ,BrH (xH ) + |D3 gH (xL ) − D3 gL (xL )|
                                    ≤ ℓ(H)γ · Cβ,β/2 ÊV ℓ(H)β−γ + C3/4−β ÊV ℓ(H)β
                                    ≡ Cβ ÊV ℓ(L)β .

If we iterate this and use the triangle inequality, we also get that for any ancestor L of H, for any
β ∈ (0, 3/4),
                              |D3 gH (xH ) − D3 gL (xL )| ≤ Cβ ÊV ℓ(L)β .
But now given any H, L ∈ P j , let H̃ and L̃ be the first ancestors of H and L with the same level
and non-empty intersection. The above bound combined with (ii) then gives

        |D3 gH (xH ) − D3 gL (xL )| ≤ |D3 gH (xH ) − D3 gH̃ (xH̃ )|
                                           + |D3 gH̃ (xH̃ ) − D3 gL̃ (xL̃ )| + |D3 gL̃ (xL̃ ) − D3 gL (xL )|
60                 BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

                                     ≤ Cβ ÊV ℓ(L̃)β .

But one can check from the cube construction that |xL −xH | ≥ c(n)ℓ(L̃), which therefore completes
the proof of (iii) (one changes β to 3/4 − β to get the exact form of (iii)).
To see (iv), the first bound follows simply from the height bound in the application of Theorem
2.2 which gave hH (see Lemma 4.6 and the subsequent discussion) and then changing coordinates
to gH (see [DLS16a, Lemma B.1]). Moreover, also from the application of Theorem 2.2 in Lemma
4.6, we know that
                              ∥DhH ∥C 0 (B6r (pH ,PH )) ≤ C ÊV ℓ(H)11/12
                                                 H

and thus the second inequality in (iv) follows immediately, with πP hH in place of πPxgH . But then
                                                                     x
the graph of gH over B4rH (xH , P0 ) is a subset of the graph of hH over B5rH (pH , PH ), and so the
tangent planes coincide on this region; thus, the result with πPxgH follows.
Finally we prove (v). Fix L ∈ S j . For i ≥ j, let P i (L) denote the set of all cubes in P i which
intersect L. If L̃ is as in (v), then noting that if H ∈ P i intersects L̃ it must be in P i (L), we have
by definition of ℘i
                                         X
              ∥℘i − gL ∥L1 (L̃) ≤ C(n)         ∥gH − gL ∥L1 (BrL (pL ,P0 )) ≤ C Ê3V ℓ(L)n+15/4
                                          H∈P i (L)


where we have used the fact that the number of cubes in P i (L) is bounded by some constant
depending only on n.                                                                     □

Finally, we can construct our center manifold from the ℘j .

Theorem 4.12 (Existence of Center Manifold). Let C ∗ be as in Lemma 4.3 and Ce ≥ C ∗ , Ch ≥
C ∗ Ce . Then, if ε2 = ε2 (V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ) ∈ (0, 1) is sufficiently small, we have:
      (i) For any β ∈ (0, 3/4), ∥℘j ∥C 3,β ([−4,4]n ) ≤ Cβ ÊV ;
     (ii) if L ∈ S i and H is a cube concentric to L with ℓ(H) = 98 ℓ(L), then ℘j = ℘k on H for any
          j, k ≥ i + 2;
     (iii) ℘j converges in C 3,β , for any β ∈ (0, 3/4), to a function ℘ : [−4, 4]n → R which is C 3,γ for
           any γ ∈ (0, 3/4).
Here, Cβ = Cβ (V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch , β) ∈ (0, ∞).

The submanifold of Rn+k given by
                                                M := graph(℘)
is called a center manifold of V relative to P0 . It is C 3,γ for any γ ∈ (0, 3/4). If we write
Φ : [−4, 4]n → Rn+k for the graphing function Φ(y) := (℘(y), y), to each L ∈ S we associate a
corresponding Whitney region L on M via:
                                                         n 
                                    L := Φ L̃ ∩ − 27 , 72
                                                 


where L̃ is the cube concentric to L with ℓ(L̃) = 17
                                                  16 ℓ(L).

Proof of Theorem 4.12. For H ∈ P j , write χH := ϑH /
                                                                   P      
                                                                   L∈P j ϑL . Clearly we have
                                 n
       P
     •    H∈P j χH = 1 on [−4, 4] ;
              BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                          61

     • ∥χH ∥C i ≤ C(n)ℓ(H)−i for each i ≥ 0.


For such H, set P j (H) := {L ∈ P j : L ∩ H ̸= ∅} \ {H} for the set of adjacent cubes to H in
P j . By construction of P j , we know |level(L) − level(H)| ≤ 1 for all L ∈ P j (H), and moreover
|P j (H)| ≤ C(n). Since for each y ∈ H we have
                                               X
                                   ℘j (y) =            χL (y)gL (y)
                                                   L∈P j (H)∪{H}


the bound ∥℘j ∥C 0 ≤ C ÊV immediately follows from the above facts and Lemma 4.11(i). Moreover,
for such y we also may write
                                                X
                             ℘j (y) = gH (y) +       (gL − gH )χL (y).
                                                       L∈P j (H)

Therefore, using Lemma 4.11(i)–(ii), for k ∈ {1, 2, 3},
                                                           k
                                                           X       X
             ∥Dk ℘j ∥C 0 (H) ≤ ∥Dk gH ∥C 0 (H) + C(n)                      ∥gL − gH ∥C i (H) ℓ(L)−(k−i)
                                                           i=0 L∈P j (H)
                                                          
                              ≤ C ÊV 1 + ℓ(H)15/4−k

(here, we have used that H ⊂ BrL (xL ) for L ∈ P j (H), which is true as M0 ≥ 4). We also obtain
by direct computation, for any β ∈ (0, 3/4),

 [D3 ℘j ]C 0,β (H) ≤ [D3 gH ]C 0,β (H)
                       3
                       X       X                                                                            
              + C(n)                     ℓ(H)−(3−i) ℓ(H)−β ∥Di (gL − gH )∥C 0 (H) + [Di (gL − gH )]C 0,β (H)
                        i=0 L∈P j (H)

         ≤ Cβ ÊV ℓ(H)3/4−β

again using Lemma 4.11(i)–(ii). This completes the proof of the bound on ∥℘j ∥C 3,β (H) , which in
particular shows that ∥℘j ∥C 3 ≤ C ÊV . We now need to extend the bound on the Hölder semi-norm
of D3 ℘j across cubes. For this, fix x, y ∈ [−4, 4]n , and let H, L ∈ P j be such that x ∈ H and
y ∈ L. If H ∩ L ̸= ∅, then clearly by taking a point in the intersection H ∩ L and using the triangle
inequality, we get
                                                                       
         |D3 ℘j (x) − D3 ℘j (y)| ≤ [D3 ℘j ]C 0,β (H) + [D3 ℘j ]C 0,β (L) |x − y|β ≤ Cβ ÊV |x − y|β .

So we may now assume that H ∩ L = ∅; without loss of generality we can assume ℓ(H) ≤ ℓ(L).
Observe that                                    √         √
                     max{|x − xH |, |y − xL |} ≤ nℓ(L) ≤ 2 n|x − y|.
Moreover, by construction we know ℘j is identically equal to gH in a neighbourhood of its center
xH ; in particular, D3 ℘j (xH ) = D3 gH (xH ). Thus, we get

    |D3 ℘j (x)−D3 ℘j (y)|
                  ≤ |D3 ℘j (x) − D3 ℘j (xH )| + |D3 gH (xH ) − D3 gL (xL )| + |D3 ℘j (xL ) − D3 ℘j (y)|
62               BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

                 ≤ Cβ ÊV (|x − xH |β + |xH − xL |β + |y − xL |β )
                 ≤ C ÊV |x − y|β

where we have used the first bound for intersecting cubes and Lemma 4.11(iii) in the second
inequality. Thus, this establishes (i).
Regarding (ii), let L ∈ S i . Observe that, by construction, P j (L) = P i+2 (L) for all j ≥ i + 2. Thus,
if H is the cube concentric with L with ℓ(H) = 89 ℓ(L), we have spt(ϑM ) ∩ H = ∅ for all M ̸∈ P j (L)
for j ≥ i + 2. So,
                               P                   P
                                 M ∈P j (L) ϑM gM     M ∈P i+2 (L) ϑM gM
                     ℘j |H = P                    = P                    = ℘i+2 |H
                                  M ∈P j (L) ϑM        M ∈P i+2 (L) ϑM

which proves (ii).
Finally, to prove (iii) we will show that ∥℘j − ℘j+1 ∥C 0 ([−4,4]n ) ≤ C2−j for some choice of C =
C(V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ); this shows that ℘j converges uniformly to some function ℘ which is continu-
ous. The bounds in (i), combined with Arzelà–Ascoli, show that in fact this convergence is in C 3,β
for all β ∈ (0, 3/4), and the limiting function ℘ is in C 3,γ for all γ ∈ (0, 3/4), hence proving (iii).
So fix x ∈ [−4, 4]n . We then have x ∈ L ∩ H, where L ∈ P j and H ∈ P j+1 , and moreover such that
either H = L or H is a child of L. Now, if level(L) ≤ j − 2, we know from (ii) that ℘j (x) = ℘j+1 (x)
and so there is nothing to prove. So we may assume level(L) ∈ {j − 1, j}. But then from (i) and
Lemma 4.11(iv) we have

 |℘j (x) − ℘j+1 (x)| ≤ |℘j (x) − ℘j (xL )| + |gL (xL ) − gH (xH )| + |℘j+1 (xH ) − ℘j+1 (x)|
                     ≤ C(∥D℘j ∥C 0 + ∥D℘j+1 ∥C 0 ) · 2−j + ∥gH − yH ∥C 0 + ∥gL − yL ∥C 0 + |yH − yL |
                     ≤ C ÊV · 2−j + C ÊV · 2−j
                     ≡ C ÊV · 2−j

where we have bounded |yH − yL | using Lemma 4.4. Hence, taking the supremum over all x we get
∥℘j − ℘j+1 ∥C 0 ≤ C ÊV 2−j , as desired. This completes the proof.                         □

This completes the construction of the center manifold. We stress that we have built into the
construction of the center manifold the decay structure of V towards its tangent planes (which
should be compared with the method used to control error2 in the proof of Theorem 3.2). This will
be crucial for later estimates regarding frequency. Our next aim is to write V as a graph over the
center manifold, and use this decay structure of V to deduce several estimates for this graph. We
will always assume the assumptions of Theorem 4.12 from now on.
4.2. Construction of normal graph and its decay properties. Let M be the center manifold
given by Theorem 4.12. Since M is C 2 , we have the standard differential-geometric fact that there
exists a tubular neighbourhood U of M on which there exists an orthogonal projection map. More
precisely, there exists an open set U ⊃ M of Rn+k such that for each x ∈ U there is a unique point
y ∈ M with |x − y| < 1 and x − y ⊥ Ty M (of course M currently is only a subset of the cylinder
Rk × [−4, 4]n and we are only interested in the orthogonal projection restricted to this cylinder).
We write p(x) := y for this uniquely determined point, and thus p : U → M is the orthogonal
projection map. Moreover, since M is in fact C 3,1/2 with its C 3,1/2 norm (i.e. that of the graphing
function ℘) controlled by C ÊV , provided ε2 is sufficiently small we may assume that p is a C 2,1/2
map, and moreover that spt∥V ∥ ⊂ U.
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                    63

Before constructing the graph over M representing V , we first give a lemma regarding the touching
set of V and M. We show that M touches V at every point of Φ(Γ), i.e. the image of the set
Γ in our Whitney decomposition used to form M, and moreover every flat singular point of V
with planar frequency ≥ 2 lies in Φ(Γ). In particular, M touches V at every flat singular point
of planar frequency ≥ 2. Recall that as V is represented by a GC 1,α function u over P0 , we have
Bu≥2 = πP0 (BV≥2 ) (here Bu≥2 means the obvious thing, namely branch points of u where the decay
rate to the tangent plane is ≥ 2).

Lemma 4.13. Assume the assumptions of Theorem 4.12. Then, if p ∈ Φ(Γ), then spt∥V ∥ ∩
p−1 (p) = p, ΘV (p) = Q, and Tp M is the unique tangent plane to spt∥V ∥ at p. Moreover,

                                           Bu≥2 ∩ [−4, 4]n ⊂ Γ

or equivalently, BV≥2 ∩ (Rk × [−4, 4]n ) ⊂ Φ(Γ). Furthermore, we even have the more quantitative
conclusion that if L ∈ S then ℓ(L) < 641√n dist(Bu≥2 , L).



Proof. To prove the first claims, fix p ∈ Φ(Γ) and let p̃ ∈ Γ be such that Φ(p̃) = p. By construction,
there is an infinite chain LN0 ⊃ LN0 +1 ⊃ · · · of cubes with Lj ∈ Rj for all j such that {p̃} = j Lj .
                                                                                                T

From Lemma 4.4(i) we know that (PLj )j converge to a plane P with ∥πPLj − πP ∥ ≤ C ÊV (211/12 )−j .
                                                     √
We also know by construction that |p − pLj | ≤ 2 n2−j . Combined with Lemma 4.4(iv), we then
have

(4.6)                                 hV (C16rLj (p, P )) ≤ C ÊV 2−j .

In particular, by Theorem 2.2 we know V C23−N0 (p, P ) is the graph of a Q-valued GC 1,α function
over P . Hence by (4.6), spt∥V ∥ ∩ p−1 (p) = {p} and ΘV (p) = Q. Now, from the failure of (EX), we
know that (ηpL ,2−j )# V converges to Q|P |; hence (ηp,2−j )# V = (η(p−pL )/2−j ,1 ◦ηpL ,2−j )# V ⇀ Q|P |
               j                                                            j               j

so that P is the approximate tangent space to spt∥V ∥ at p. By ∥πLj − πP ∥ ≤ C ÊV (211/12 )−j and
Lemma 4.11(iv) (cf. Theorem 4.12), we have Tp M = P . This establishes the first claims.

Now let us turn to the second claims regarding flat singular points with planar frequency ≥ 2.
We know in general from Corollary 3.4 and Theorem 3.2 that at any x0 ∈ Bu≥2 , if Pq0 is the
corresponding tangent plane to V at q0 = (y0 , x0 ) ∈ spt∥V
                                                       √ ∥ (note that there is exactly one such y0
as this point has density Q), then we have for r ∈ (0, n),

                                      ÊV (Br (q0 ), Pq0 ) ≤ C(V)ÊV r,

                                     hV (Br (q0 ), Pq0 ) ≤ C(V)ÊV r2 .
We also know from the Lipschitz regularity and the bound provided by Theorem 2.2 that for any
(y, x) ∈ spt∥V ∥ we have |y − y0 | ≤ C(V)ÊV |x − x0 | and also ∥πPq − πP0 ∥ ≤ C(V)ÊV (this claim
involving the Lipschitz regularity is using that (y0 , x0 ) is a Q-coincidence point of V ).

Thus, now suppose that L ∈ C j , j ≥ N0 , is such that there is q0 = (y0 , x0 ) with q0 ∈ BV≥2 and
               √
|x0 −xL | ≤ 128 nℓ(L). Then, by the above inequalities we know that |yL −y0 | ≤ C(V)ÊV |xL −x0 | ≤
                              n+k
C(V)ÊV ℓ(L), and thus BL ⊂ BC(V,M  0 )ℓ(L)
                                            (q0 ). Thus,

                                                n+k
                   ÊV (BL ) ≤ C(V, M0 )n ÊV (BC(V,M0 )ℓ(L)
                                                             (q0 )) ≤ C̃(V, M0 )ÊV ℓ(L).
64                BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

We get from this also that (arguing similarly to that in Lemma 4.4)
                                                                             
                                                   n+k
             ∥πPL − πPq0 ∥ ≤ C ÊV (BL ) + ÊV (BC(V,M   0 )ℓ(L)
                                                                 (q0 ), Pq0 )   ≤ C ÊV ℓ(L)

from which it follows that

               hV (BL ) ≤ hV (BC(V,M0 )ℓ(L) (q0 ), Pq0 ) + Cℓ(L)∥πPL − πPq0 ∥ ≤ C Ê2V ℓ(L)2 .

We stress here that the constants above only depend on V, M0 . In particular, this shows that
whenever L ∈ C j , j ≥ N0 , is such that there exists q0 = (y0 , x0 ) a point of planar frequency ≥ 2 in
                        √
V with |x0 − xL | ≤ 128 nℓ(L), then L ̸∈ Sej ∪ Shj (provided Ce , Ch are sufficiently large depending
only on V, M0 ).
We now use this to prove the lemma. Suppose for contradiction that there is q0 = (y0 , x0 ) with
x0 ∈ Bu≥2 ∩ [−4, 4]n yet x0 ̸∈ Γ. Then, by definition of Γ, there must be j ≥ N0 and L ∈ S j
                     √
with |xL − x0 | ≤ nℓ(L). By the above, we must have L ∈ Snj . But then there must be a cube
L̃ ∈ Sek ∪ Shk , where k ∈ {N0 , N0 + 1, . . . , j − 1}, and cubes L ≡ Lj , Lj−1 , . . . , Lk ≡ L̃, with Lt ∈ Snt
for each j ≤ t ≤ k + 1, and Lt ∩ Lt−1 ̸= ∅. But then
                                                        j
                                                   √ X −i  √
                                    |xL̃ − x0 | ≤ 2 n 2 ≤ 4 nℓ(L̃)
                                                       i=k

and so L̃ satisfies the above assumptions, which gives the desired contradiction.
Finally, to prove the last claim of the lemma, suppose for contradiction that there is L ∈ S j with
ℓ(L) > 641√n dist(x0 , L), for some such q0 = (y0 , x0 ) ∈ BV≥2 . Then
                                                            √             √
                             |xL − x0 | ≤ dist(x0 , L) +        nℓ(L) ≤ 65 nℓ(L).

But then we can argue just as above to get a contradiction.                                                   □

Remark 4.14. Due to our choice of exponent in (EX) the above proof shows that points of planar
                       1
frequency ≥ 1 + (1 − 12  ) also lie in Φ(Γ). By changing the exponent in (EX) we can guarantee
points of planar frequency ∈ [5/3 + η, ∞) belong to Γ for any choice of η ∈ (0, 1/3].

Now we begin giving the properties of our normal graph. Clearly the above lemma tells us that
on Φ(Γ), the normal graph will vanish, as M touches V on this set. We now give some properties
about the rest.

Lemma 4.15. Assume the assumptions of Theorem 4.12. Then we have:
       P
   (i)   x∈p−1 (y) ΘV (x) = Q for all y ∈ M;

     (ii) if L ∈ S, then for each x ∈ L we have

                                 spt∥V ∥ ∩ p−1 (Φ(x)) ⊂ BC
                                                         n+k
                                                           Ê ℓ(L)
                                                                   (Φ(x)),
                                                                   V


         where C = C(V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ).

Proof. Claim (i) is a simple consequence of the fact that V is a Q-valued Lipschitz graph with
Lipschitz constant controlled by C ÊV , as well as the fact ∥℘∥C 3 ≤ C ÊV .
              BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                   65

To see (ii), fix L ∈ S and x ∈ L. Let J be the cube concentric with L with ℓ(J) = 17
                                                                                   16 ℓ(L). By
definition of ℘, Theorem 4.12(ii), and Lemma 4.11(ii), we have
                                        X
                    ∥℘ − gL ∥C 0 (J) ≤        ∥gL − gH ∥C 0 (J) ≤ C ÊV ℓ(L)15/4 .
                                         H∈S:H∩L̸=∅


But we know that the graph of gL coincides with that of hL and moreover that ∥uL ∥C 0 ≤ C̃ ÊV ℓ(L).
So, if pL = (zL , wL ) ∈ PL ×PL⊥ , since pL ∈ spt∥V ∥ we immediately get ∥(uL )a −wL ∥C 0 ≤ C ÊV ℓ(L).
Standard estimates with convolutions then give ∥hL −wL ∥C 0 ≤ C ÊV ℓ(L). These in turn imply that
for any point of spt∥V ∥ in C15rL (pL , PL ), we have that the distance to the graph of hL is at most
C ÊV ℓ(L), which proves the claim because spt∥V ∥ ∩ p−1 (Φ(x)) ⊂ C15rL (pL , PL ) simply because V
is represented exactly by uL here.                                                                   □

Notice that Lemma 4.15(i) already tells us that V must be a Q-valued graph over M, which
moreover must be GC 1,α due to Theorem 2.2 and the C 3 regularity of M. Moreover, Lemma
4.15(ii) gives us an a priori bound on the C 0 -norm of this function. The key property, however, of
our construction is that on each cube we can control the average of the normal graph, and moreover
the average of the normal graph is higher order (namely, it is higher order than quadratic) when
compared to the overall graph. This is made precise in the following theorem and is one of the
crucial aspects of building the center manifold the way we did (as this will be needed to control
certain error terms later on; the other crucial aspects are the doubling-style conditions coming from
Lemma 4.17 and Lemma 4.19).

Theorem 4.16. Assume the assumptions of Theorem 4.12. Then if ε2 = ε2 (V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ) ∈
(0, 1) is sufficiently small, there is a GC 1,α function F : M → AQ (U) taking the form F (x) =
PQ                               PQ                     n+k ) is a GC 1,α function with N (x) ⊥ T M
   i=1 Jx + Ni (x)K, where N ≡     i=1 JNi K : M → AQ (R                                 i       x
for all x ∈ M, such that V U is the integral varifold associated to the image of F . Moreover, on
every Whitney region L (associated to a cube L ∈ S) we have:
    (i) ∥N |L ∥C 0 ≤ C ÊV ℓ(L);
                                          1
    (ii) ∥DN |L ∥GC 0,α ≤ C ÊV ℓ(L)1− 12 ;
                                      1
   (iii) L |Na | ≤ C Ê3V ℓ(L)n+2(1− 12 )+1 .
         R

Here, C = C(V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ), and moreover α = α(V) ∈ (0, 1) is as in Theorem 2.2.

Definition: We call the map N : M → AQ (Rn+k ) given by Theorem 4.16 the normal map; it
represents V as a Q-valued graph over M.

Proof. We already know from Lemma 4.15 and Theorem 2.2 that a GC 1,α map F of the given form
exists whose associated varifold coincides with V U. We only need to justify the other claims.
By Lemma 4.15(ii) the C 0 bound on N follows, proving (i). For (ii), this follows also from the
corresponding bound on uL , and the fact that by Lemma 4.11(iv) and the C 2 estimate on ℘ given
by Theorem 4.12, M ∩ CrL (pL , PL ) is the graph of a function ℘L : BrL (pL , PL ) → PL⊥ obeying
|D℘L | ≤ C ÊV ℓ(L)11/12 at the point (℘(xL ), xL ) and so ∥D℘L ∥C 0 ≤ C ÊV ℓ(L)11/12 , as ∥D2 ℘L ∥C 0 ≤
C ÊV (we refer the reader to [DLS15, Theorem 5.1] for the precise details on reparameterising
multi-valued graphs). This shows (ii).
For (iii), let p ∈ L. We then have by reparameterising (see again [DLS15, Theorem 5.1]),

              |Na (p)| ≤ C|(uL )a (πPL (p)) − πP⊥L (p)| + CLip(N |L )∥πTp M − πPL ∥ · |N (p)|
66                  BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

(4.7)                   ≤ C|(uL )a (πPL (p)) − πP⊥L (p)| + C Ê3V ℓ(L)17/6

using the bounds from (i) and (ii). Now, if we let ℘L : PL → PL⊥ be such that graph(℘L ) = M, we
see that
            Z                                  Z
                                   ⊥
              |(uL )a (πPL (p)) − πPL (p)| ≤ C       |(uL )a − ℘L |
                L                                      πPL (L)
                                                ≤ C∥(uL )a − hL ∥L1 (πP (L)) + C∥gL − ℘∥L1 (L̃)
                                                                         L

                                                ≤ C Ê3V ℓ(L)n+15/4

where in this last line we have used Lemma 4.8 and Lemma 4.11(v) (here, L̃ is the cube concentric
with L and ℓ(L̃) = 98 ℓ(L)). So, integrating (4.7) gives the result.                           □

This concludes the “new” estimates we will need to use the center manifold in the first place,
namely the smallness of the average in a very controlled way. Next, we need to establish more
“standard” estimates, which mirror those seen in Section 3 when dealing with the error terms
from the planar frequency function. In Section 3, we found regions where certain decay conditions
stopped and used an appropriate Vitali cover and a doubling condition to control the error term
error∗2 therein. Here, the regions where the decay stops have already been built into our center
manifold construction: these are the cubes in S. Since the center manifold was not constructed
“randomly”, but is built from ua , which itself is close to a harmonic function, we can therefore
establish the equivalent estimates and doubling conditions for the normal map N . The argument is
somewhat more technical, as M is not flat and moreover there are three types of cubes to consider,
but the reader should note the similarity in this part of the argument to that used for planar
frequency.
Let us start with the simplest case, namely the height cubes. The main goal is to control in every
height cube the size of the average-free part of N from below by the length of the respective cube;
this is a stronger form of a doubling-type condition as it is an L∞ statement rather than an L2
statement. This is achieved in (ii) of the following lemma:

Lemma 4.17 (Height Cube Control). There is a constant C̄ ∗ = C̄ ∗ (M0 ) ∈ (0, ∞) such that the
following holds. Suppose that Ch ≥ C̄ ∗ Ce . Then, if ε2 = ε2 (V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ) ∈ (0, 1) is sufficiently
small, then the following hold for every L ∈ Sh :
                                        n+k
      (i) ΘV (p) ≤ Q − 1 for every p ∈ B16rL
                                             (pL );

     (ii) |Nf (x)| ≥ 14 Ch ÊV ℓ(L) for every x ∈ Φ(B2n√nℓ(L) (xL , P0 ));

     (iii) L ∩ H = ∅ for every H ∈ Sn with ℓ(H) ≤ 12 ℓ(L).

Proof. (i) is a simple consequence of the GC 1,α regularity of V : if we had a point of density Q in
 n
B16rL
      (pL ), then we would get that17 the separation of V in BL is ≤ C(V)ÊV ℓ(L), and so (HT)
                                                                                n
would not fail for L, i.e. L ̸∈ Sh . Thus, there are no points of density Q in B16r  (pL ) and thus as
                                                                                   L
ΘV ∈ {1, 2, . . . , Q} (again from the graph structure) we see it must be ≤ Q − 1 everywhere.
Claim (ii) also follows from the GC 1,α regularity of V . Since by definition of Sh there are two points
in BL which have separation ≥ Ch ÊV ℓ(L), and since V is a multi-valued graph with Lipschitz
17Indeed, one can consider the father L
                                      e of L to see this, as V   C48rLe (pLe ) is the graph of a GC 1,α function with
Lipschitz constant ≤ C(V)ÊV ℓ(L) and that BL ⊂ C48rLe (pLe ).
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                   67

constant ≤ C(V)Ce ÊV ℓ(L)11/12 , on a region of radius proportional to ℓ(L) each value of V can
only change by an amount at most C(V)Ch ÊV ℓ(L)1+11/12 (as Ce ≤ Ch ). Thus, if N0 = N0 (V) is
                              1
sufficiently large, this is < 16 Ch ÊV ℓ(L), which combined with the other estimates on M proves
(ii). (Alternatively, one can ensure this using Ch ≥ C ∗ Ce and choosing C ∗ sufficiently large.)

Finally, (iii) follows in essentially the same way as (ii), by showing that if (HT) holds on L, then
on every H ∈ C j with j ≥ level(L) + 1 and H ∩ L ̸= ∅, then (HT) still holds on H. Thus, it can
never be the case that H ∈ Sn . Indeed, suppose there is H ∈ S with level(H) ≥ level(L) + 1 and
H ∩ L ̸= ∅. From our construction of S it follows that level(H) = level(L) + 1 and so ℓ(H) = 12 ℓ(L).
Moreover, from Lemma 4.4 we know ∥πPH − πPL ∥ ≤ C1 ÊV ℓ(H)11/12 . Arguing as in (ii), since (HT)
holds on L, we see that for ε2 sufficiently small,
                                             3             3
                             |πP ⊥ (x − y)| ≥ Ch ÊV ℓ(L) = Ch ÊV ℓ(H)
                                H            4             2
for some x, y ∈ spt∥V ∥ ∩ C32rL (pL , PL ). But then this gives that BH must contain two points x, y
with |πP ⊥ (x − y)| ≥ 32 Ch ÊV ℓ(H), showing that H satisfies (HT) and so H ̸∈ Sn . This completes
        H
the proof.                                                                                        □



The next case we analyse is that of the neighbouring cubes, i.e. Sn . Notice that Lemma 4.17(iii)
tells us that if H ∈ Sn then H must in fact spawn from a cube in Se , as it cannot be adjacent to
any larger cube in Sh . From this, we can deduce the following fact, morally saying that any cube
in Sn is “covered” by a cube in Se . Indeed, Lemma 4.17(iii) gives that if H ∈ Sn , then we can
find a chain L0 , L1 , . . . , Lj ≡ H such that L0 ∈ Se , Li ∈ Sn for all i ≥ 1, and Li ∩ Li−1 ̸= ∅ with
level(Li ) = level(Li−1 ) + 1 for all i ≥ 1. In particular, for such a chain we have

                                       H ⊂ B3√nℓ(L0 ) (xL0 , P0 ).

Now fix an ordering on the (countable) set Se such that the level is increasing along the ordering.
For H ∈ Sn , we then choose L0 ∈ Se minimal in this ordering for which there is a chain as just
described starting at L0 and ending at H. We call L0 the spawner of H. We may therefore partition
Sn into disjoint sets Sn (J), for J ∈ Se , where Sn (J) is the set of all H ∈ Sn whose spawner is J.
We call Sn (J) the spawners of J.

The following lemma regarding the spawner of H ∈ Sn is a simple consequence of the analysis so
far. Here, for q ∈ M we write Br (q) for the geodesic ball in M of radius r centred at q. The reason
we need such a lemma is because currently we do not know any decay property for the cubes in
Sn , and so we will use the spawner to control them, and so we need to know the relation between
H and its spawner.

Lemma 4.18 (Spawners of Neighbouring Cubes Sn ). If ε2 = ε2 (V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ) ∈ (0, 1) is
sufficiently small, then the following holds. Fix r > 0 and suppose H ∈ Sn intersects B :=
πP0 (Br (0)). Then, if J ∈ Se is the spawner of H, we have

                              3r                                          √
                    ℓ(J) ≤     √       and      dist(J, B), dist(H, J) ≤ 3 nℓ(J).
                             64 n


Notation: Here, recall dist(A, B) := inf{|a − b| : a ∈ A, b ∈ B}.
68                BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS
                                                               √
Proof. We know by definition of the spawner that dist(H, J) ≤ 2 nℓ(J), and thus
                                                   √           √
                        dist(J, B) ≤ dist(H, J) + 2 nℓ(H) ≤ 3 nℓ(J)

which proves the second claim. If r ≥ 1/4, the first claim is trivial given that
                                                                            √ 7−Nℓ(J) ≤ 2−N0 −6 for
all cubes in S (cf. Lemma 4.3) and moreover that N0 is assumed to obey n2           0 ≤ 1. Assume

therefore that r ≤ 1/4. Since ∥D℘∥C 2,1/2 ≤ Cε2 from Theorem 4.12, if ε2 is sufficiently small we
know that Br/2n (0) ⊂ B ⊂ B (0) for any r. But as H intersects B ⊂ B (0), this tells us (with the
                            r                                            r
                    √                             √
                                                                                      √
fact dist(H, J) ≤ 2 nℓ(J)) that J intersects Br+3 nℓ(J) (0), and so dist(0, J) ≤ r + 3 nℓ(J). But
then from Lemma 4.13, we have (as 0 ∈ BV≥2 )
                                                              √
                                           1             r + 3 nℓ(J)
                                   ℓ(J) ≤ √ dist(0, L) ≤      √
                                         64 n               64 n

which if we rearrange for ℓ(J) gives ℓ(J) ≤ 61r√n ≤ 643r
                                                       √ , which is the first inequality.
                                                         n
                                                                                                               □


Finally, we give the key doubling condition for the excess cubes Se . This is most similar to that
seen in the argument for planar frequency seen in Section 3, namely when we used Lemma 2.6.
Just like for planar frequency, we need to move the center-point inward by an amount comparable
to the radius ℓ(L), so that we can introduce the cut-off function φ from Section 3 when controlling
error terms by those involved in the definition of the frequency function.

Lemma 4.19 (Excess Cube Doubling Condition). There exist constants M̄0 = M̄0 (n, k) and C̄e =
C̄e (V, M0 ) such that if M0 ≥ M̄0 and Ce ≥ C̄e , and if ε2 = ε2 (V, M0 , N
                                                                          √0 , Ce , Ch ) is sufficiently
small, then the following holds. If L ∈ Se and q ∈ P0 obeys dist(L, q) ≤ 6 nℓ(L), then
                                                    Z
                                              1
                                2     n+2(1− 12 )
                            C ÊV ℓ(L)            ≤              |DN |2 .
                                                          Φ(Bℓ(L)/4 (q,P0 ))

Here, C = C(V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ) ∈ (0, ∞).

Proof. The proof is a modification of that seen in Lemma 2.6, where now we need to prove the
doubling condition after “subtracting the center manifold”. As the center manifold is close to the
average (uL )a , and the average is close to being harmonic, one expects to argue in a similar fashion.
Throughout, we fix a constant λ = λ(n) ∈ (0, 1) obeying18 (1 + λ)n+2 < 21/12 .
Step 1: Linear setting. We first start with a variant of Lemma 2.5. Fix δ > 0. We claim that
there is β = β(V, δ) ∈ (0, ∞) with the following property: if v ∈ BV obeys (for r < 1/2)
                       Z                                         Z
                                               2    1/12    −n−2
                                 |Dv − Dva (0)| ≥ 2      ·2            |Dv|2
                           B(1+λ)r (0)                                         B2r (0)

then, for all Bs (q) ⊂ B2r (0) with s ≥ δr we have
                                  Z                  Z
                                              2    2
                                        |Dvf | ≥ β                       |Dv|2 .
                                         Bs (q)            B(1+λ)r (0)


18Here, the exponent 1/12 ≡ 1 − (1 − 1 ) comes from the choice of exponent in (EX). This proof illustrates why the
                                         12
exponent in (EX) cannot be taken to be 1.
               BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                                                         69

R see this2 we argue by contradiction. If it were false, after rescaling to assume 2r = 1 and
To
 B1 (0) |Dv| = 1 (which Rwe can do in a similar manner to that seen in Lemma 2.5) we can find a
sequence vj ∈ BV with B1 (0) |Dvj |2 = 1 for all k and
                                   Z
                                                    |Dvj − D(vj )a (0)|2 ≥ 21/12 · 2−n−2
                                    B(1+λ)/2 (0)

yet                                Z                                 Z
                                                          2   1                                           1
                                                 |D(vj )f | <                           |Dvj |2 ≤
                                       Bsj (qj )              j        B(1+λ)/2 (0)                       j
for some Bsj (qj ) ⊂ B1 (0) with sj ≥ δ/2. Passing to a subsequence so that sj → s ≥ δ/2, qj → q,
                                                           1,2
with Bs/2 (q) ⊂ B 1−s/4 (0), and vj → v ∈ BV strongly in Wloc  (B1 (0)), we get
                                                      Z
                                                                   |Dvf |2 = 0.
                                                       Bs/2 (q)

Hence, as Ra result of the monotonicity from Theorem 2.4, we see that |Dvf | ≡ 0 on B1 (0); in
                                 2
particular B       (0) |D(vj )f | → 0.
               (1+λ)/2



We then have, as (vj )a is harmonic for each k, from the mean-value property of harmonic functions,
          Z                                       Z
                                               2
        Q               |D(vj )a − D(vj )a (0)| =          |Dvj − D(vj )a (0)|2 − |D(vj )f |2
               B(1+λ)/2 (0)                                         B(1+λ)/2 (0)

and thus
                   Z                                                                             Z
                                                               2         1/12         −n−2
               Q                  |D(vj )a − D(vj )a (0)| ≥ 2                    ·2          −                       |D(vj )f |2 .
                   B(1+λ)/2 (0)                                                                  B(1+λ)/2 (0)

                                                                                                 2 =          Q|D(vj )a |2 + |D(vj )f |2 )
                                                                                R                         R
Taking j → ∞, we therefore get (noting also that 1 =                             B1 (0) |Dvj |
           Z                                                                                                     Z
                                                2         −1        1/12        −n−2         1/12         −n−2
                           |Dva − Dva (0)| ≥ Q                 ·2          ·2          ≥2            ·2                    |Dva |2 .
           B(1+λ)/2 (0)                                                                                           B1 (0)

But as va is harmonic, it should satisfy the decay estimate
                  Z                                                 Z
                              |Dva − Dva (0)|2 ≤ (1 + λ)n+2 · 2−n−2                                            |Dva |2
                         B(1+λ)/2 (0)                                                                 B1 (0)

which by choice of λ therefore gives the desired contradiction.

Step 2: Pass linear estimate to non-linear setting. Now we want to use Step 1 to prove a
form of Lemma 2.6 for the present setting, which is the claim of the lemma.

First pick j with L ∈ Sej . Then let H ∈ Rj−1 and J ∈ Rj−6 be ancestors of L. From Lemma 4.6
we know that there is a function uHJ : B16rJ (pJ , PH ) → AQ (PH⊥ ) representing V in the cylinder
C16rJ (pJ , PH ). We also know that BL ⊂ BH ⊂ C16rJ (pJ , PH ) (c.f. (4.3)). By Lemma 4.4 we also
have
             ÊV (C32rJ (pJ , PH )) ≤ C ÊV ℓ(L)11/12 and hV (C32rJ (pJ , PH )) ≤ C ÊV ℓ(L)
70                BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

where C = C(V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ). Moreover, as L ∈ Se , BL ⊂ C16rJ (pJ , PH ), and rL /rJ = 2−6 , we
know that
                     Ce ÊV ℓ(L)11/12 ≤ ÊV (BL ) ≤ c(n)ÊV (C32rJ (pJ , PH )).
Now write ρ := 32rH − C̃ ÊV ℓ(L), for suitably chosen C̃ = C̃(V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ). From the above
bound on hV (C32rJ (pJ , PH )), since pH ∈ spt∥V ∥ it evidently follows that (for suitable C̃)

                                        spt∥V ∥ ∩ C2ρ (pH , PH ) ⊂ BH .

Thus, expressing the tilt-excess in terms of uHJ , we get
                    Z
             (2ρ)−n                    |DuHJ |2 ≤ (1 + C Ê2V ) · Ê2V (C2ρ (pH , PH ))
                        B2ρ (πPH (pH ),PH )

                                                       ≤ Ê2V (BH ) + C Ê2V · Ê2V (C2ρ (pH , PH )).
                         √                              √
Now, since |pH − pL | ≤ 2 nℓ(H), if we set σ := 64rL + 2 nℓ(H), we have
                                                           
                             2          1 λ                 λ
                σ = 32rH +     rH ≤       +     64rH ≤ 1 +      ρ + 2C̃ ÊV ℓ(L).
                            M0          2 4                 2

This string of inequalities is possible if 1/M0 ≤ 8λ, i.e. if M0 = M0 (n) is sufficiently large. Hence,
if√ε2 is sufficiently small, we see that σ ≤ (1 + λ)ρ. Hence, as |πPH (pL ) − πPH (pH )| ≤ |pL − pH | ≤
2 nℓ(L), we see that
                                BL ⊂ C64rL (pL , PH ) ⊂ C(1+λ)ρ (pH , PH ).
                       1
                             R
Next, let A := ωn [(1+λ)ρ] n B      (πP (pH ),PH ) D(uHJ )a be the average of D(uHJ )a on this ball, and
                               (1+λ)ρ    H
let τ be the plane whose graph is that of the function PH → PH⊥ which sends x 7→ A · x. Expressing
the tilt-excess in terms of uHJ , we then get
                                   Z
                                −n
                  2
         (1 + C ÊV )[(1 + λ)ρ]                  G(DuHJ , QJAK)2 ≥ Ê2V (C(1+λ)ρ (pH , PH ), τ )
                                     B(1+λ)ρ (πPH (pH ))

                                                                             ≥ Ê2V (BL , τ )
                                                                             ≥ Ê2V (BL ).

Now, we know from the application of Theorem 2.2 in C32rJ (pJ , PH ) (enabled by Lemma 4.6)
that for any η > 0, provided ε2 is sufficiently small (also now depending on η) there is a function
v ∈ BV with (up to rotation and translation) v : B16rJ (πPH (pJ )) → AQ (PH⊥ ) such that (writing
E := ÊV (C2ρ (pH , PH )) for ease of notation)
                                   Z
                                                                     2
                           (2ρ)−n                 E −1 |DuHJ | − |Dv| ≤ η.
                                      B2ρ (πPH (pH ),PH )

This in particular implies the same smallness condition but for the averages:
                            Z
                         −n
                    (2ρ)                   |E −1 D(uHJ )a − Dva |2 ≤ Q−1 η ≤ η.
                               B2ρ (πPH (pH ),PH )

Since va is harmonic, we know R from the mean-value property of harmonic functions that we have
                        1
Dva (πPH (pH )) = ωn [(1+λ)ρ]n B     (πP (pH ),PH ) Dva , and hence combining this with the above
                                    (1+λ)ρ    H
               BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                                              71

inequalities we get19
                    Z
   (1 + C Ê2V )E 2                                 G(Dv, QJDva (πPH (pH ))K)2 ≥ [(1 + λ)ρ]n Ê2V (BL ) − Cρn E 2 η
                       B(1+λ)ρ (πPH (pH ),PH )

and                        Z
                   E   2
                                                    |Dv|2 ≤ (2ρ)n Ê2V (BH ) + Cρn E 2 η + Cρn Ê2V E 2 .
                           B2ρ (πPH (pH ),PH )

Now since ÊV (BL ) ≥ Ce ÊV ℓ(L)11/12 ≥ 2−11/12 ÊV (BH ), we therefore have (as λ > 0)
              Z
          2
 (1 + C ÊV )                     G(Dv, QJDva (πPH (pH ))K)2
                 B(1+λ)ρ (πPH (pH ),PH )
                                                                                   Z
                                                                            −n−2
                                                         ≥2  2/12
                                                                       ·2                                |Dv|2 − Cρn η − Cρn Ê2V .
                                                                                   B2ρ (πPH (pH ),PH )


Furthermore, notice that since (2ρ)−n B2ρ (πP (pH ),PH ) E −2 |DuHJ |2 can be made arbitrarily close
                                        R
                                               H
to 1, and therefore we know that for suitably small η that (2ρ)−n B2ρ (πP (pH ),PH ) |Dv|2 ≥ 1/2, we
                                                                     R
                                                                           H
see that if we choose η and ε2 sufficiently small we get
       Z                                                                Z
                                                                   −n−2
                                                      2
                           G(Dv, QJDva (πPH (pH ))K) ≥ 2   1/12
                                                                ·2                     |Dv|2 .
         B(1+λ)ρ (πPH (pH ),PH )                                                                     B2ρ (πPH (pH ),PH )

Therefore, now we can apply the claim from Step 1 (with an appropriate choice of δ = δ(n, M0 ))
to conclude that there is a constant β = β(V, M0 ) ∈ (0, 1) such that
                            Z                          Z
                          2                        2
                        β                     |Dv| ≤                 |Dvf |2
                                    B(1+λ)ρ (πPH (pH ),PH )                        Bℓ(L)/8 (q,PH )

for any ball Bℓ(L)/8 (q, PH ) ⊂ B2ρ (πPH (pH ), PH ). In particular, passing this estimate back to uHJ
using the estimates above and absorbing error terms, we get
                                                  Z
                                    n 2
                              Cℓ(L) ÊV (BL ) ≤                 |D(uHJ )f |2
                                                                    Bℓ(L)/8 (q,PH )


i.e. using the lower bound ÊV (BL ) ≥ Ce ÊV ℓ(L)11/12 , we have
                                                Z
(‡)                         C Ê2V ℓ(L)n+11/6 ≤               |D(uHJ )f |2 .
                                                                   Bℓ(L)/8 (q,PH )

All that remains is to pass from this inequality to the final√estimate by changing from uHJ to
N . So consider any ball Bℓ(L)/4 (q, P0 ) where dist(L, q) ≤ 6 nℓ(L). For simplicity, write Ω :=
Φ(Bℓ(L)/4 (q, P0 )). Note that πPH (Ω) must contain a ball Bℓ(L)/8 (q̃, PH ) of the form above due to
the estimates on ℘ (from Theorem 4.12) and ∥πPH − πP0 ∥ (from Lemma 4.4); choose any such ball,
and note that we have the estimate (‡) with q̃ in place of q.
Now, noting that, for each x, inf a G(DuHJ (x), QJaK) = G(DuHJ (x), QJD(uHJ )a (x)K), we get that
|D(uHJ )f | ≤ G(DuHJ , QJD℘′ K) everywhere, where ℘′ is the function defined on B16rJ (πPH (pJ ), PH )

19Here we are also using that inf          R
                                                   G(v, QJaK)2 =
                                                                   R
                                                                        G(v, QJv̄K)2 , where v̄ = |B|
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                         R
                                                                                                                 va .
                                    a∈Rk       B                    B                                        B
72                      BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

whose graph coincides with M. Thus we have
                  Z                          Z
                              |D(uHJ )f |2 ≤                                           G(DuHJ , QJD℘′ K)2 .
                             Bℓ(L)/8 (q̃,PH )                   Bℓ(L)/8 (q̃,PH )

The right-hand side of this inequality is then controlled by
      Z                                         Z
                                   ′ 2
                   G(DuHJ , QJD℘ K) ≤ C(V)                   ∥πTX V − πTx+℘′ (x) M ∥2 d∥V ∥(X)
          Bℓ(L)/8 (q̃,PH )                                      Cℓ(L)/8 (q̃,PH )


where here we have written x = πPH (X) (note that x + ℘′ (x) ∈ M by definition). Now, because
we have |p(X) − (x + ℘′ (x))| ≤ C Ê2V ℓ(L)1+11/12 (which follows from the graph structure as the
left-hand side is controlled by C ÊV ℓ(L)11/12 |X − p(X)| from our estimates in Theorem 4.12), we
get
        ∥πTp(X) M − πTx+℘′ (x) M ∥ ≤ C∥D2 ℘′ ∥C 0 |p(X) − (x + ℘′ (x))| ≤ C ÊV · Ê2V ℓ(L)1+11/12
and thus
  Z                                              Z
                                         ′   2
                        G(DuHJ , QJ℘ K) ≤ C                 ∥πTX V − πTp(X) M ∥2 d∥V ∥(X) + C Ê6V ℓ(L)n+2+11/6 .
     Bℓ(L)/8 (q̃,PH )                             p−1 (Ω)

But now expanding this latter tilt-excess term in terms of the normal map N , we have (see [DLS15,
Proposition 3.4])
           Z                                                   Z
                                      2             2    11/6
                  ∥πTX V − πTp(X) M ∥ ≤ (1 + C ÊV ℓ(L)       ) |DN |2 + C Ê4V ℓ(L)n+2 .
                  p−1 (Ω)                                                                Ω

Putting all of these estimates together, including with (‡), we get
                                                         Z
                      2     n+11/6            2    11/6
                  C ÊV ℓ(L)       ≤ C(1 + ÊV ℓ(L)     ) |DN |2 + C Ê4V ℓ(L)n+2 .
                                                                                   Ω

From this we evidently see that, for ε2 sufficiently small, we have
                                                       Z
                                   C Ê2V ℓ(L)n+11/6 ≤     |DN |2
                                                                               Ω

which concludes the proof.                                                                                          □


4.3. Frequency relative to center manifold. We now combine all the estimates from the pre-
vious subsection to show that the normal map N has an associated frequency function (namely,
the frequency of V relative to M) which is approximately monotone. We now fix choices of
M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch , depending only on V, so that the results of the previous sections hold.

Let φ : [0, ∞] → [0, 1] be the same function from Section 3. For each r ∈ (0, 3] we then define
                                             Z          
                                                    d(p)
                               D(r) := r 2−n
                                                φ          |DN (p)|2 dp
                                              M      r

and                                                    Z                  
                                                            ′       d(p)
                                   H(r) := −r    1−n
                                                           φ                   d(p)−1 |N (p)|2 dp,
                                                       M             r
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                              73

where d(p) denotes the geodesic distance in M between p and 0 ∈ M. Here, N is the normal map
to M given by Theorem 4.12. Note that these are the corresponding expressions to those defined
in Section 3 (up to controlled factors) except relative to M rather than a plane. When H(r) > 0,
we define the center manifold frequency function by

                                                                        D(r)
                                                          I(r) :=            .
                                                                        H(r)

Remark: We will show later in Remark 4.26 that indeed H(r) > 0 for all r > 0: this will follow in
an identical fashion to that seen in Section 3, once we are able to control certain extra error terms
which arise in the equivalent choice of test function in the first variation.

Just like with the planar frequency, where we wanted to rule out an infinite order of contact between
V and the plane, here we want to rule out that V has an infinite order of contact with M, for which
we will establish an approximate monotonicity of the frequency function I(r). The argument will
mirror that of the planar case, except with more error terms due to M being potentially curved.

Throughout, we will write ∂r̂ for the derivative with respect to arc-length along geodesics in M
starting at 0. Let exp denote the exponential map T0 M ⊃ B3 → M. We will also write Br (0) for
the geodesic ball in M of radius r and centred at 0.

By the area formula, we can write H(r) as
                             Z
                    H(r) = −       φ′ (|z|) · |z|−1 · |N (exp(rz))|2 · Jexp (rz) dz
                                      T0 M

where Jexp is the Jacobian of exp. Therefore, if we differentiate under the integral sign, we get
                       Z                     X
           H′ (r) = −2      φ′ (|z|) · |z|−1   ⟨Ni (exp(rz)), ∂r̂ Ni (exp(rz))⟩ · Jexp (rz) dz
                          T0 M                               i
                                     Z
                                                                                             d
                                 −                φ′ (|z|) · |z|−1 |N (exp(rz))|2 ·             Jexp (rz) dz.
                                      T0 M                                                   dr
                                                                               d
Now, as M is a C 3,1/2 manifold, exp is a C 2,1/2 map, and so certainly dr       Jexp (rz) is bounded by
                                                                         n
∥℘∥C 3,1/2 , i.e. by C(V)ÊV . Hence, as d exp0 (y) = |y| for every y ∈ B1 (0), we see that if we change
coordinates back via the area formula,
                                  Z                          Q
                                                             X
                  ′          −n               ′       d(p)
(4.8)          H (r) = −2r                φ                            ⟨Ni (p), ∂r̂ Ni (p)⟩ dp + O(1)ÊV H(r)
                                     M                 r
                                                                 i=1

where by O(1) we mean a term which is bounded (in terms of V). For ease of notation we will write
                                                   Z                        Q
                                                                            X
                                                                     d(p)
                        E(r) := −r1−n                     φ′                      ⟨Ni (p), ∂r̂ Ni (p)⟩ dp
                                                      M               r
                                                                            i=1

and so (4.8) is equivalent to

(4.9)                                    |H′ (r) − 2r−1 E(r)| ≤ C ÊV H(r)

where C = C(V).
74              BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

Recall that the normal projection map p : U → M is a C 2,1/2 function. We now consider two types
of variation, entirely analogous to those used in Section 3 for planar frequency (namely, variations
in the normal and tangential directions to M) to derive the key variational identities needed to
show the approximate monotonicity of I(r).



                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                             d(p(p))
First, we consider the outer variation (i.e. normal variation) Xo (p) := φ                                      r          p⊥ (p) where
p⊥ (p) := p − p(p). Observe that Xo is supported in p−1 (Br (0)) (we should also cut Xo off verti-
cally, as the support of V is in U, to assume Xo has compact support in Rn+k without changing
the computations,
                   but we shall omit
                                      this detail). To ease notation, for p ∈ M we will write
              d(p)       ′         ′  d(p)
φr (p) := φ r       and φr (p) := φ    r    . So, applying the first variation formula for V and writ-
ing everything in terms of the normal map N (which represents V everywhere) we get (see [DLS15,
Theorem 4.2]):
                           Z                       Q
                                                   X                                      3
                                                                                          X
(4.10)                          φr |DN |2 +                 Ni ⊗ ∇φr : DNi =                    Erroj
                            M                      i=1                                    j=1

where                                                       Z
                                           Erro1 = Q                φr ⟨HM , Na ⟩,
                                                             M
                                                                Z
                                           |Erro2 | ≤ C0             φr |A|2 |N |2 ,
                                                                M
                                   Z
                   |Erro3 | ≤ C0       (|N ||A| + |DN |2 )(φr |DN |2 + |Dφr ||DN ||N |)
                                   M
where HM is the mean curvature vector of M and A is the second fundamental form of M (techni-
cally, [DLS15, Theorem 4.2] requires φ to be C 1 , but we can get around this by an approximation
argument). Multiplying this by r2−n we get
                                       Z           X                               3
                                                                                   X
                    D(r) = −r1−n             φ′r    ⟨Ni (p), ∂r̂ Ni (p)⟩ dp + r2−n   Erroj
                                        M           i                                              j=1

i.e.
                                                                         3
                                                                         X
(4.11)                                 D(r) − E(r) = r2−n                       Erroj .
                                                                          j=1

Second, consider the inner variation (i.e. tangential variation) given by Xin (p) := Y (p(p)), where
for p ∈ M,                                                
                                            d(p)      d(p)     ∂
                                  Y (p) :=       ·φ          ·      .
                                             r         r       ∂ r̂
If we take Xin in the first variation formula for V , we get (see [DLS15, Theorem 4.3])
                   Z                                    Q                                           3
                      1                    X                         X
(4.12)                  |DN |2 divM (Y ) −   ⟨DNi : (DNi · DM Y )⟩ =   Errin
                                                                          j
                    M 2
                                                    i=1                                            j=1
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                                 75

where                                         Z
                           Errin
                              1 =Q                  ⟨HM , Na ⟩divM (Y ) + ⟨DY HM , Na ⟩,
                                                M
                                                    Z
                               |Errin
                                   2 | ≤ C0              |A|2 (|DY ||N |2 + |Y ||N ||DN |),
                                                     M
                           Z
            |Errin
                3 | ≤ C0         |Y ||A||DN |2 (|N | + |DN |) + |DY |(|A||N |2 |DN | + |DN |4 ).
                           M
We may compute
                                                                         
                                 ′       d(p)
                                    d(p) ∂       ∂       d(p)     Id
               DM Y (p) = φ              ·    ⊗    +φ                + O(1)ÊV ,
                                     r2 ∂ r̂ ∂ r̂
                                          r               r        r
                                                        
                                 ′ d(p)     d(p)      d(p)  n             
                   divM Y (p) = φ          · 2 +φ                + O(1)ÊV
                                     r       r         r       r
and so therefore we get, after multiplying by 2r2−n ,
                                     Z                                                              3
                                                                                                    X
(4.13)             ′
               D (r) = −2r      −n
                                             φ′r (p)d(p)|∂r̂ N (p)|2 dp + O(1)ÊV D(r) + 2r2−n            Errin
                                                                                                             j ,
                                         M                                                          j=1

which, if we simplify notation by writing
                                                             Z
                                 G(r) := −r             −n
                                                                 φ′r (p)d(p)|∂r̂ N (p)|2 dp,
                                                             M

is equivalent to
                                                                                     3
                                                                                     X
(4.14)                     D′ (r) − 2G(r) = O(1)ÊV D(r) + 2r2−n                           Errin
                                                                                              j .
                                                                                     j=1


The main work that remains is to bound the error terms Erroj and Errin      j . Note that “error” is
only a reasonable name for these terms if they are actually smaller than the main terms, i.e. those
involving D(r) and H(r). As D(r) and H(r) are quadratic in N or DN , we see that the worse error
terms a priori are Erro1 and Errin
                                 1 , as these are only linear in N (notice that if M were minimal,
as was the case for planar frequency when M was taken to be a plane, these terms would vanish).
However, since they are in fact linear in Na , we hope to control them by making Na small. This is
exactly the reason for the center manifold construction. We will bound the errors in terms of D(r)
and H(r), which is why we needed to control both the tilt and the height in the center manifold
construction, and moreover why we had to be delicate with ensuring that Na is always of a higher
order than D(r) and H(r) (cf. Theorem 4.16), which we did by building the center manifold over
regions where decay stops.
When estimating the error terms, we will need to pass from the domain of integration, namely
Br (0), to the region in the plane B := πP0 (Br (0)) where we had our Whitney decomposition
forming M. Notice that as ∥℘∥C 3,1/2 ≤ Cε2 (see Theorem 4.12) we know that B is a C 2 convex
set which moreover has the property that, for all z ∈ ∂B there is a ball Br/2 (y, P0 ) ⊂ B with
B r/2 (y, P0 ) ∩ ∂B = {z}.
We therefore need to look at the Whitney regions that intersect B and control the error terms
across them. Analogously to the situation in Section 3, in order to reintroduce the function φr in
76                BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

our estimates, we need to be able to choose smaller balls which stay away from ∂B by a definite
amount compared to the size of the Whitney region: for this we use our doubling-style conditions,
such as Lemma 4.19 in the case of excess cubes Se . Morally, in Section 3 we only had to do this for
excess cubes Se , whereas here we now need to also look at Sh and Sn . The argument is essentially
analogous for Sh to that of Se (easier, in fact, as there is always a definite amount of separation),
and so Sh does not cause any significant complication. For Sn , however, we do not have an a priori
decay-change, and so we need to take the additional step at looking at its spawner, which has a
decay-change, and use this with Lemma 4.19. The complication is that, whilst the spawner is in Se ,
it might not lie inside B, and so we need to be careful choosing the ball for the doubling condition.
For such cubes we will need a slight modification, as we shall see.
So, we define a family of cubes T ⊂ Se ∪ Sh corresponding to each Whitney region intersecting B
as follows:
     (i) T contains all L ∈ Se ∪ Sh which intersect B;
     (ii) if L′ ∈ Sn intersects B, then L ∈ T , where L ∈ Se is the spawner of H.
                                                                                  √
By Lemma 4.18 and Lemma 4.13 we know that ℓ(L) ≤ 643r       √ and dist(L, B) ≤ 3 nℓ(L) if L ∈ T .
                                                             n
For each L ∈ T , recall that xL is the center of L. We then define an associated ball by
                                                             √
                 B L := Bs(L) (xL , P0 )  where      s(L) := nℓ(L) + dist(xL , B).

Necessarily B L ∩ B ̸= ∅ for each L ∈ T (and thus the ball B L always “comes inside” B slightly
whilst being centred at xL ).
                                                        √
Remark 4.20. Note that for L ∈ T we have s(L) ≤ 5 nℓ(L). Indeed, if L ∩ B ̸= ∅, then
              √                     √
dist(xL , B) ≤ nℓ(L) and so s(L) ≤ 2 nℓ(L). Otherwise, L must be the spawner of some L′ ∈ Sn
                                                        √                              √
                 B. By Lemma 4.18 we know dist(L, B) ≤ 3 nℓ(L), and so dist(xL , B) ≤ 4 nℓ(L).
which intersects √
Hence, s(L) ≤ 5 nℓ(L).

We now define a countable family F ⊂ T of cubes such that {B L }L∈F is a maximal pairwise
disjoint collection of balls. For this, first write S := supL∈T s(L) and select a maximal pairwise
disjoint subcollection F1 ⊂ T of cubes with s(L) ≥ S/2; clearly F1 is finite. Then, inductively at
stage k ≥ 2, select a maximal subcollection Fk ⊂ T such that {B L }L∈Fk are pairwise disjoint, these
                                           L̃                                         −k   1−k
balls do not intersect any ofS the balls B with L̃ ∈ F1 ∪ · · · ∪ Fk−1 , and s(L) ∈ [2 S, 2 S) for
L ∈ Fk . We then set F := k Fk . As F is a countable union of finite sets, we may fix an ordering
F = {Li }i∈N of F such that s(Li ) is decreasing.
Of course, we may then partition the cubes of S which intersect B into disjoint families {S(Li )}Li ∈F
depending on the associated ball which is intersected. Indeed, let H ∈ S have B ∩ H ̸= ∅. Then:
     (a) if H ∈ Se ∪ Sh , then H ∈ T , and so there is i ∈ N with B H ∩ B Li ̸= ∅. Choose i minimal
         with this property and set H ∈ S(Li ).

     (b) if H ∈ Sn , then its spawner J obeys J ∈ Se ∩ T . Hence, there is i ∈ N with B J ∩ B Li ̸= ∅.
         Choose i minimal with this property and set H ∈ S(Li ).

Remark 4.21. Notice that for (a) we must have s(Li ) ≥ s(H)                                    s(J)
                                                           2 and in (b) we must have s(Li ) ≥ 2 .
This follows simply because if H ∈ T had B H ∩ B Li = ∅ for all Li with s(Li ) ≥ s(H)  2 , then, by
construction of F , if we choose k such that s(H) ∈ [2−k S, 21−k S) then the collection Fk could be
increased by including H in it, contradicting the maximality of Fk .
                BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                   77

Remark: We have S(Li ) ̸= ∅ for each i. Indeed, if Li ∩ B ̸= ∅ then Li ∈ S(Li ) (as all the {B Lj }j∈N
are pairwise disjoint). Similarly, if Li ∩ B = ∅, then there is H ∈ Sn with H ∩ B ̸= ∅ for which Li
is the spawner of H, and again H ∈ S(Li ).

Remark 4.22. We claim that if H ∈ S(Li ) then

                                          H ⊂ B65√nℓ(Li ) (xLi ).

                √ suppose H ∈ Sn . Let J ∈ T be the spawner of H. We know from Lemma 4.18 that
To see this, first
dist(H, J) ≤ 3 nℓ(J), and so H ⊂ B3√nℓ(J)+2√nℓ(H)+√nℓ(J) (xJ ) ⊂ B5√nℓ(J) (xJ ). As B Li ∩ B J ̸= ∅,
we know |xJ − xLi | ≤ s(Li ) + s(J) ≤ 3s(Li ), where
                                                 √ we have used s(J) ≤ 2s(Li ) from
                                                                               √ Remark 4.21.
We also know from Remark 4.20 that s(Li ) ≤ 5 nℓ(Li ), and so |xJ − xLi | ≤ 15 nℓ(Li ). Hence

                              H ⊂ B5√nℓ(J) (xJ ) ⊂ B5√nℓ(J)+15√nℓ(Li ) (xLi ).
         √                              √
But as       nℓ(J) ≤ s(J) ≤ 2s(Li ) ≤ 10 nℓ(Li ), we therefore get

                                           H ⊂ B65√nℓ(Li ) (xLi )

                                                                                Li  J
which is the claimed inclusion. In the other√ case, we have H ∈ Se ∪ Sh and so B ∩ B ̸= ∅. As
above, this gives |xH − xLi | ≤ 3s(Li ) ≤ 18 nℓ(Li ), and hence

                     H ⊂ B√nℓ(H) (xH ) ⊂ B√nℓ(H)+18√nℓ(Li ) (xLi ) ⊂ B24√nℓ(Li ) (xLi )

which thus proves the claim.

Remark 4.23. The inclusion in Remark 4.22 immediately gives that if H ∈ S(Li ) then ℓ(H) ≤
65ℓ(Li ).

For each Li ∈ T , by definition of B Li we can clearly choose a ball Bℓ(Li )/4 (x̃, P0 ) ⊂ B Li ∩ B which
lies at least a distance ℓ(Li )/4 from ∂B, where x̃ ∈ B Li ∩ B is some point. (This was essentially
the point of the definition of s(Li ), to come into B a definite amount: we can choose x̃ on the line
segment connecting xLi to 0.) Choose one such ball for each cube Li ∈ F, and we will denote this
choice of ball by B(Li ). To summarise, we have the following properties of F = {Li }i∈N :
    (I) if Li ∈ F , then Li ∈ Se ∪ Sh , and Li has an associated ball B(Li ) of radius ℓ(Li )/4 which
        obeys B(Li ) ⊂ B Li ∩ B, dist(B(Li ), ∂B) ≥ ℓ(Li )/4, and whose center lies on the line
        segment connecting xLi to 0;

   (II) if i ̸= j, then B Li ∩ B Lj = ∅, and so in particular B(Li ) ∩ B(Lj ) = ∅ and Li , Lj are distinct;
  (III) if H ∈ S intersects B, then H ∈ S(Li ) for some i, and H ⊂ B65√nℓ(Li ) (xLi ). Moreover, the
        families S(Li ) are disjoint, i.e. S(Li ) ∩ S(Lj ) = ∅ for i ̸= j.
Now write                                                        [
                       BLi := Φ(B(Li ))      and      ULi :=              Φ(H) ∩ Br (0).
                                                               H∈S(Li )

These are the analogous balls from those in Section 3 used to cover via the doubling condition. Ob-
serve that, as ∂B = πP0 (∂Br (0)), from simple properties of projections we have dist(BLi , ∂Br (0)) ≥
dist(B(Li ), ∂B), and so from (I) above we have

                                       dist(BLi , ∂Br (0)) ≥ ℓ(Li )/4.
78                 BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

Thus, we have
                                                                     ℓ(Li )
                                                       inf φr ≥             .
                                                       BLi            4r
Noting by (III) that ULi ⊂ Φ(B65√nℓ(Li ) (xLi )), we see that

                                                                                C
                        sup φr − inf φr ≤ C(n)Lip(φr )ℓ(Li ) ≤                    ℓ(Li ) ≤ C inf φr .
                        U Li       U Li                                         r            BLi


But now one can check20 that inf ULi φr ≤ C(n) inf BLi φr , and so we therefore get

(4.15)                                               sup φr ≤ C inf φr .
                                                     ULi              BLi


Finally, note that from Theorem 4.16 we have the following estimates:

(4.16)                                        ∥N ∥C 0 (UL ) ≤ C ÊV ℓ(Li );
                                                             i



                                                                                      11
(4.17)                                    ∥DN ∥GC 0,α (UL ) ≤ C ÊV ℓ(Li ) 12 ;
                                                                 i


                                              Z
                                                                                 17
(4.18)                                               |Na | ≤ C Ê3V ℓ(Li )n+ 6 .
                                              U Li

Indeed, the first two follow directly from Theorem 4.16, the definition of ULi as a union over H ∈
S(Li ), and the fact that ℓ(H) ≤ 65ℓ(Li ) (see Remark 4.23) for H ∈ S(Li ). For the third, this also
follows in the same manner, namely summingP     the corresponding estimates from Theorem 4.16 over
each H ∈ S(Li ), just additionally noting that H∈S(Li ) ℓ(H)n ≤ C(n)ℓ(Li )n , because all H ∈ S(Li )
are disjoint (except for sets of measure zero) and are contained in the ball B65√nℓ(Li ) (xLi ) (so, one
can compare the measures). This also then implies that H∈S(Li ) ℓ(H)n+ε ≤ 65ε C(n)ℓ(Li )n+ε for
                                                           P

every ε > 0, simply using the fact ℓ(H) ≤ 65ℓ(Li ) for each H ∈ S(Li ) (see Remark 4.23).
We can now begin controlling the error terms. First, we note the following simple lemma. Here,
we write                                        Z
                                             −n
                                   Σ(r) := r        φr |N |2 .
                                                                     M

Lemma 4.24. There exists a constant C = C(n) ∈ (0, ∞) such that

                     Σ(r) ≤ CD(r) + CH(r)   and      rΣ′ (r) ≤ −nΣ(r) + H(r),
                                       Z
                                   r−n    |N |2 ≤ Σ(r) + H(r),
                                                    Br (0)
                                          Z
                                 r2−n               |DN |2 ≤ (n − 1)D(r) + rD′ (r).
                                           Br (0)

20Indeed, if L ∩ B ̸= ∅, then L ∈ S(L ) and so the claim follows simply because the center point of B(L ) is closer
              i                i     i                                                                 i
to 0 than that of xLi (cf. (I) above) and the radius of B(Li ) is smaller than the side-length of Li . If Li ∩ B = ∅,
then Li must be the spawner of some cube H ∈ Sn with H ∩ B ̸= ∅, which moreover we know obeys H ∈ S(Li ).
                                                 √
From Lemma 4.18 we know that dist(H, Li ) ≤ √   3 nℓ(Li ), and thus as Li ∩ B = ∅, there is a point x in H obeying
               √                                            √
dist(x, ∂B) ≤ 3 nℓ(Li ), and thus inf ULi φr ≤ 7 nℓ(L
                                                  r
                                                     i)
                                                        ≤ 28 n inf BLi φr .
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                79

Moreover, if there is a constant δ > 0 such that I(r) ≥ δ, then we have Σ(r), rΣ′ (r) ≤ CD(r), and
                                          Z
                                      r−n       |N |2 ≤ CD(r)
                                               Br (0)

where now C is allowed to depend also on δ.

Remark: We will subsequently show that in fact we unconditionally have I(r) ≥ δ for some fixed
constant δ (which could depend on V ); see Corollary 4.28. With this, the above statements hold
with no assumption on I(r), but allowing the constants to depend on this lower bound on I(r).
However, one still needs the above lemma as an intermediate step in the proof of this frequency
lower bound.




Proof. Note that φr |N |2 is a Lipschitz function of compact support in Br (0), and so using the
Poincaré inequality followed by Cauchy–Schwarz we get
                             Z                        Z                    Z
            Σ(r) ≤ r−n · Cr     |D(φr |N |2 )| ≤ Cr−n   |φ′r ||N |2 + r1−n   φr |N ||DN |
                             M                               M                      M
                                                                        1/2   1/2
                                                 ≤ CH(r) + CΣ(r) D(r)
                                                           1
                                                 ≤ CH(r) + Σ(r) + CD(r),
                                                           2
where in the last inequality we have used 2ab ≤ a2 + b2 for suitable a, b ∈ R. Rearranging clearly
gives the first claimed inequality. We also have
                              Z                   Z
                                                     d(p) ′
            Σ′ (r) = −nr−n−1       φr |N |2 − r−n       2
                                                          φr |N |2 ≤ −nr−1 Σ(r) + r−1 H(r)
                               M                   M  r

giving the second inequality. For the third, as φ′ ≡ −2 on (1/2, 1) and φ′ ≡ 0 on (0, 1/2), we easily
have                               Z
                                                           1
                                                    |N |2 ≤ rn H(r)
                                    Br (0)\Br/2 (0)        2
and as φ ≡ 1 on (0, 1/2) we have      Z
                                                   |N |2 ≤ rn Σ(r).
                                        Br/2 (0)

Summing these inequalities gives the third inequality. For the fourth, note that
                                        Z                    Z
                    ′                                             d(p) ′
                  D (r) = (2 − n)r  1−n             2
                                            φr |DN | − r 2−n
                                                                     2
                                                                       φr |DN |2
                                         M                    M    r
                                                    Z
                                    −1          1−n
                         ≥ (2 − n)r D(r) + r                     |DN |2
                                                            Br (0)\Br/2 (0)

and again, as φ ≡ 1 on (0, 1/2),
                                           Z
                                    r2−n                |DN |2 ≤ D(r).
                                           Br/2 (0)
80               BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

Multiplying the first inequality here by r and summing with the second, we get
                                  Z
                            r2−n        |DN |2 ≤ (n − 1)D(r) + rD′ (r).
                                          Br (0)

Finally, if I(r) ≥ δ, this gives H(r) ≤ δ −1 D(r). Hence the first inequality of the lemma gives
Σ(r) ≤ C(1 + δ −1 )D(r), whilst the second gives (as Σ(r) ≥ 0) rΣ′ (r) ≤ D(r). For the final
inequality, this now follows from the third inequality of the lemma.                          □



The last ingredient we need in order to bound the error terms correctly is to provide a way to
control the different error terms. For this, we will control the scales ℓ(Li ) for the family of cubes
F = {Li }i∈N described previously. As we can relate all the relevant quantities to these scales, this
will provide us with a convenient way to control the error terms in terms of the quantities D(r)
(and H(r)). We stress again, this works because we have built into our center manifold the failure
of the decay of tilt and height.

Lemma 4.25. Fix δ > 0 and suppose I(r) ≥ δ. Then,
                               X
                          Ê2V   ℓ(Li )n+2 inf φr ≤ Crn−2 D(r),
                                                    BLi
                                            i
                                X
                         Ê2V       ℓ(Li )n+2 ≤ Crn−2 (n − 1)D(r) + rD′ (r) .
                                                                           

                                i
Moreover,
                                        2                           1
                                    ÊVn+3 sup ℓ(Li ) ≤ C rn−2 D(r) n+3 .
                                                i
Here, C = C(V, δ) ∈ (0, ∞).


                                                                                     √
Proof. First note that if Li ∈ Sh then necessarily Li ∩ B ̸= ∅, and so s(Li ) ≤ 2 nℓ(L). Hence,
B(Li ) ⊂ B Li ⊂ B2√nℓ(Li ) (xLi , P0 ). In particular, Lemma 4.17(ii) gives that |Nf | ≥ 41 Ch ÊV ℓ(Li )
on BLi . Hence, if Li ∈ Sh , we have (as we may assume Ch ≥ 1)
                                 Z
                                       φr |N |2 ≥ C inf φr · Ê2V ℓ(Li )n+2 .
                                     BLi             BLi

                                                    √
Moreover, if Li ∈ Se ,√
                      then since we know s(Li ) ≤ 6 nℓ(Li ), we know that the center of B(Li ) is at
a distance at most 6 nℓ(Li ) from Li , and hence we may apply Lemma 4.19 with the ball B(Li ).
This therefore gives, for any Li ∈ Se ,
                              Z
                                                                       11
                                   φr |DN |2 ≥ C inf φr · Ê2V ℓ(Li )n+ 6 .
                                    BLi              BLi


In particular, we have for every i,
                                                     (Z                       Z                )
(4.19)               C Ê2V ℓ(Li )n+2 inf φr ≤ max              φr |DN |2 ,         φr |N |2       .
                                          BLi             BLi                 BLi
            BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                81

If we now sum the above estimate over i, using the fact that BLi are pairwise disjoint, we therefore
get                                               Z              Z
                            X
                          2          n+2
                      C ÊV    ℓ(Li )    inf φr ≤ φr |DN | + φr |N |2
                                                             2
                                                BLi
                               i
and so if I(r) ≥ δ, then from Lemma 4.24 we get
                                    X
                               Ê2V   ℓ(Li )n+2 inf φr ≤ Crn−2 D(r)
                                                       BLi
                                            i

which is the first claimed inequality. For the second, note that by the same argument as above
(just without φr ) we get for each Li ∈ Se ∪ Sh ,
                                                (Z          Z        )
                         C Ê2V ℓ(Li )n+2 ≤ max                    |DN |2 ,         |N |2   .
                                                             BLi              BLi


Summing this over i and using Lemma 4.24 (using again I(r) ≥ δ) we get
             X                Z           Z
           2            n+2           2
                                                |N |2 ≤ Crn−2 (n − 1)D(r) + rD′ (r)
                                                                                   
       C ÊV     ℓ(Li )     ≤    |DN | +
                i                  Br (0)              Br (0)


giving the second claimed inequality. For the final one, return to (4.19) which gives, using Lemma
4.24 with I(r) ≥ δ for the right-hand side and using inf BLi φr ≥ ℓ(L i)
                                                                    4r on the left-hand side:

                                       Ê2V ℓ(Li )n+3 ≤ Cr · rn−2 D(r).
                                         1
Raising this inequality to the power of n+3 and taking the supremum over i gives the result.      □




We can now prove the desired error bounds. Throughout, we will assume that I(r) ≥ δ for some
constant δ > 0.

  S first that, since ∥D℘∥C 2,1/2 ≤ C ÊV , we have that ∥HM ∥∞ + ∥DHM ∥∞ ≤ C ÊV . Therefore,
Notice
as i ULi = Br (0) and the ULi are disjoint, using the smallness in L1 of Na from (4.18), and the
bound (4.15), as well as Lemma 4.25, we get
                                        Z
                                o
                            |Err1 | ≤ Q     φr |HM ||Na |
                                          M
                                            XZ
                                    ≤ C ÊV         φr |Na |
                                                   i     U Li
                                                   X                                  5
                                        ≤ C ÊV        sup φr · Ê3V ℓ(Li )n+2+ 6
                                                   i   U Li
                                                   X                            5
                                        ≤ C Ê4V       inf φr · ℓ(Li )n+2+ 6
                                                       BLi
                                                   i
                                                                                5
                                        ≤ C Ê2V · rn−2 D(r) · sup ℓ(Li ) 6
                                                                       i
                                                       n−2
                                                                  1+ 5
                                        ≤ C ÊV · r           D(r)   6(n+3)
                                                                            .
82                BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

Analogously, we have
                                      Z
                                   −1
                |Errin
                    1  | ≤ C(n)Qr          (|HM | + |DY HM |) |Na |
                                       M
                                     X                  5
                         ≤ C ÊV r−1    Ê3V ℓ(Li )n+2+ 6
                                             i
                                                                               5
                        ≤ C ÊV · r−1 · rn−2 (n − 1)D(r) + rD′ (r) · rn−2 D(r) 6(n+3) .
                                                                  


These are the desired bounds on the first error terms; again, we stress that controlling these “linear”
error terms was precisely the reason we had to construct a center manifold in the first place. The
other error terms are in some sense “higher order” and are in theory easier to deal with, or the
same order and can be incorporated into the frequency argument.
For the second error terms, note that ∥A∥∞ ≤ C∥D℘∥C 2 ≤ C ÊV . It follows immediately that

                                                 |Erro2 | ≤ C Ê2V · rn Σ(r).

Moreover, as |DXin | ≤ Cr−1 1Br (0)\Br/2 (0) , we have (using Cauchy–Schwarz and Lemma 4.24)
                                         Z                               Z
                              2 −1
                |Errin
                    2 | ≤ C ÊV r                     |N |2 + C Ê2V          φr |N ||DN | ≤ C Ê2V rn−1 D(r).
                                             Br (0)

Finally we bound the errors of the third type. We have:
             Z                                    Z                           Z
                                                 −1               3          −1
       o                    2            4
  |Err3 | ≤ C φr ÊV |DN | |N | + |DN | +C r                 |DN | |N | +C r             ÊV |N |2 |DN | .
             |            {z               }         B r (0)                     B r (0)
                                               |           {z        }     |              {z          }
                                =: I1                                          =: I2                               =: I3

We estimate each term separately using (4.16), (4.17), (4.15), and Lemma 4.24, similarly to those
for the errors of the first type:
                                   X                         5                  1+ 5
                    I1 ≤ C Ê4V          sup φr · ℓ(Li )n+2+ 6 ≤ C ÊV rn−2 D(r)   6(n+3)
                                                                                          ;
                                     i   ULi

                  X                      3                X                    3                         1+ 3
      I2 ≤ Cr−1        Ê4V ℓ(Li )n+3+ 4 ≤ C Ê4V                   ℓ(Li )n+2+ 4 inf φr ≤ C ÊV rn−2 D(r)   4(n+3)
                                                                                                                   ;
                                                                                    BLi
                   i                                        i

                                                 Z                                                            Z
                       −1
                            X               11
                                                                               −1
                                                                                                    11
            I3 ≤ Cr             Ê2V ℓ(Li ) 12                  2
                                                         |N | ≤ C ÊV r              r   n−2
                                                                                               D(r) 12(n+3)            |N |2
                            i                     U Li                                                        Br (0)
                                                                                        1+ 11
                                                                    ≤ C ÊV    rn−2 D(r)   12(n+3)
                                                                                                   .

Thus combining these estimates, we see that
                                                                1+ 3
                                          |Erro3 | ≤ C rn−2 D(r)   4(n+3)
                                                                          .

Finally, for the inner variations we have
                Z                       Z                       Z                                                           Z
    in                         2                  3          −1                                       2                −1
|Err3 | ≤ C ÊV    φr |N ||DN | + C ÊV   φr |DN | + C ÊV r                                       |N | |DN | + Cr                      |DN |4 .
                                                                                          Br (0)                               Br (0)
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                                      83

The first term here is exactly the first term in I1 above, and the third term is exactly I3 above;
                                                1+ 3
thus, they are both controlled by C rn−2 D(r)       4(n+3)
                                                           . We then have
                 Z                    X                      3                 1+ 3
             ÊV   φr |DN |3 ≤ C Ê4V   sup φr · ℓ(Li )n+2+ 4 ≤ C ÊV rn−2 D(r)   4(n+3)

                                              i   U Li


bounding as above, and
                 Z                       X            2          X            2
            r −1
                     |DN |4 ≤ C Ê4V r−1   ℓ(Li )n+3+ 3 ≤ C Ê4V   ℓ(Li )n+2+ 3 inf φr
                   Br (0)                                                                               BLi
                                                         i                            i
                                                                                           1+ 2
                                                                          ≤ C ÊV rn−2 D(r)   3(n+3)



bounding as we did in I2 . So, we see that
                                                               1+ 2
                                     |Errin
                                         3 | ≤ C ÊV r
                                                       n−2
                                                           D(r)   3(n+3)
                                                                         .

To conclude, we have:
                                   3
                                                                        2
                                                                  1+ 3(n+3)
                                   X
(4.20)                      r2−n         |Erroj | ≤ C ÊV D(r)                 + C Ê2V r2 Σ(r),
                                   j=1

                 3
                                                   2                                        2
                                                                                      1+ 3(n+3)
                 X
          r2−n         |Errin               3(n+3) D′ (r) + C Ê r −1 D(r)                        + C Ê2V rD(r).
                           j | ≤ C ÊV D(r)                     V
                 j=1

(Note that we do not know the sign of D′ (r) meaning we have been imprecise here with the
constants, however we omit this detail as it is a minor point.)

To summarise, we have now shown:

(4.21)                                   |H′ (r) − 2r−1 E(r)| ≤ C ÊV H(r);

                                                                        2
                                                                  1+ 3(n+3)
(4.22)                      |D(r) − E(r)| ≤ C ÊV D(r)                        + C Ê2V r2 Σ(r);

                                                                                    2                     2
                                                                              1+ 3(n+3)
(4.23)       |D′ (r) − 2G(r)| ≤ C ÊV D(r) + C ÊV r−1 D(r)                               + C ÊV D(r) 3(n+3) D′ (r).

We stress that these bounds are currently under the assumption that I(r) ≥ δ, with the constant
C = C(V, δ). We will remove this assumption shortly with an appropriate choice of δ.

Remark 4.26. We can now show that H(r) > 0 is always true. Indeed, if H(r) = 0 for some r,
then |N | ≡ 0 on Br (0) \ Br/2 (0), which in turn gives that E(r) = 0. In fact, if H(r) = 0, then all
conclusions of Lemma 4.24 go through without any assumption on a lower bound for I(r), and thus
all the above computations hold. Thus, (4.22) still holds (which we note comes from the analogous
variation as that used in the usual ‘squash inequality’, which gives the equivalent conclusion for
the planar frequency) and hence we would have
                                                                   2
                                                             1+ 3(n+3)
                                   D(r) ≤ C ÊV D(r)                     + C Ê2V r2 Σ(r).
84                 BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

But we also have from the first inequality in Lemma 4.24 (as H(r) = 0) that Σ(r) ≤ CD(r), and
hence we get
                                               1+ 2
                            D(r) ≤ C ÊV D(r) 3(n+3) + C Ê2V r2 D(r).
Thus, if ÊV is sufficiently small, rearranging this would give that D(r) ≤ 0, i.e. D(r) = 0, and so
|DN | = 0 on Br (0). But as |N | ≡ 0 on Br (0)\Br/2 (0), this would mean that |N | ≡ 0 on Br (0), i.e. V
coincides with QJBr (0)K here. But as M was a C 3,1/2 manifold, this would contradict 0 ∈ sing(V ).
Thus we have reached the desired contradiction, and so H(r) > 0 for all r > 0. In particular, I(r)
is well-defined for all r > 0 (and again we stress this is true without assuming any lower bound on
I(r)).

We can now prove the first fact about the center manifold frequency, which is a growth-bound. In
particular, this gives that supr I(r) < ∞. We will use this in turn to establish a uniform lower
bound on I(r), i.e. inf r I(r) > 0, giving our choice of δ above, and then finally we will use this to
show that I(r) is approximately monotone in r.

Theorem 4.27 (Frequency Growth Bound). If ε2 = ε2 (V) ∈ (0, 1) is sufficiently small, then for
all 0 < a ≤ b < 1,
                                                               4
                                                            3(n+3)
                                          I(a) ≤ eC ÊV b            (1 + I(b)).
Here, C = C(V).

Remark: Clearly Theorem 4.27 gives supr∈(0,1) I(r) ≤ eC ÊV (1 + I(1)) < ∞.

Proof. Set Ω(r) := log(max{I(r), 1}). To prove the theorem, it suffices to show that
                                                                4
(⋆)                                        Ω(a) ≤ C ÊV b 3(n+3) + Ω(b)

for some C = C(V). Indeed, once we have this we can take exponentials of both sides to get
                                           4                                          4
                                        3(n+3)                                     3(n+3)
              max{I(a), 1} ≤ eC ÊV b            max{I(b), 1} =⇒ I(a) ≤ eC ÊV b            (1 + I(b))

as desired.
To prove (⋆), first note that if Ω(a) = 0 then there is nothing to prove, and so we may assume
that Ω(a) > 0. Then set b̃ := sup{t ∈ (a, b] : Ω > 0 on (a, t)}, i.e. b̃ is the first zero of Ω greater
than a and at most b; if this set is non-empty and b̃ < b, then Ω(b̃) = 0 ≤ Ω(b), and so if we can
                          4
prove Ω(a) ≤ C ÊV b̃ 3(n+3) + Ω(b̃), the result follows. In particular, it suffices to work on (a, b̃) in
this case, where Ω > 0. In the other cases, we know that Ω > 0 on (a, b). Thus, we may without
loss of generality assume that Ω > 0 on (a, b), i.e. I(r) > 1, as this case will imply the full result.
Fix r ∈ (a, b). As I(r) > 1, all of our previous estimates where we assumed a uniform lower bound
I(r) ≥ δ now hold with δ = 1; in particular, the constants only depend on V. From (4.22) and the
fact that Σ(r) ≤ CD(r) from Lemma 4.24, we know
                                                         2
                                                                    
                         |D(r) − E(r)| ≤ C ÊV D(r) 3(n+3) + C ÊV r2 D(r)

and so if ÊV is sufficiently small depending only on V, this gives
                                                            1
                                             |D(r) − E(r)| ≤ D(r)
                                                            2
              BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                                       85

and hence
                                            1
(4.24)                                        D(r) ≤ E(r) ≤ 2D(r).
                                            2
From this we conclude, as I(r) > 1 > 0 (and thus D(r) > 0) that E(r) > 0 for r ∈ (a, b). Now, as
Ω(r) = log I(r) = log D(r) − log H(r) here, we can compute

                                     D′ (r) H′ (r)
                            Ω′ (r) =       −
                                     D(r)    H(r)
                                      ′
                                     D (r) H′ (r) D′ (r)(E(r) − D(r))
                                   =       −       +                  .
                                     E(r)    H(r)      E(r)D(r)

From (4.21) we know
                                           H′ (r)   2r−1 E(r)
                                                  ≤           + C ÊV
                                           H(r)       H(r)
and from (4.23) we know
                                                                         2                         2
                                                                 1+
            D′ (r)   2G(r)         D(r)              D(r) 3(n+3)             D(r) 3(n+3) ′
                   ≥       − C ÊV       − C ÊV r−1               − C ÊV              D (r)
            E(r)      E(r)         E(r)                  E(r)                  E(r)
                     2G(r)                             2                   2
                                                                              −1
                   ≥       − C ÊV − C ÊV r−1 D(r) 3(n+3) − C ÊV D(r) 3(n+3) D′ (r)
                      E(r)

where in the second inequality here we have used (4.24). Finally, since from (4.22)
                                                                  2
                                                            1+ 3(n+3)
                           |D(r) − E(r)| ≤ C ÊV D(r)                   + C Ê2V r2 Σ(r)

we have, again using (4.24) in the denominator,
                                                                         2
                                                                  1+
                 D′ (r)(E(r) − D(r))          D′ (r)(D(r) 3(n+3) + r2 Σ(r))
                                     ≥ −C ÊV
                      E(r)D(r)                            D(r)2
                                                      2
                                                         −1                D′ (r)Σ(r)
                                     ≥ −C ÊV D(r) 3(n+3) D′ (r) − Cr2 ÊV            .
                                                                            D(r)2

Combining the above inequalities, we get

                 G(r)H(r) − r−1 E(r)2                             2
  Ω′ (r) ≥ 2 ·                        − C ÊV − C ÊV r−1 D(r) 3(n+3)
                      E(r)H(r)
                                                                               2
                                                                                   −1                      D′ (r)Σ(r)
                                                          − C ÊV D(r) 3(n+3)           D′ (r) − Cr2 ÊV              .
                                                                                                            D(r)2

By Cauchy–Schwarz, we have G(r)H(r) ≥ r−1 E(r)2 , and hence, noting that D(r) ≤ C Ê2V r2 (as 0
is a point of planar frequency ≥ 2)

                                       4
                                             −1                  2
                                                                        −1                    D′ (r) · r2 Σ(r)
         Ω′ (r) ≥ −C ÊV − C ÊV r 3(n+3)         − C ÊV D(r) 3(n+3)        D′ (r) − C ÊV                    .
                                                                                                   D(r)2
86                BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

Integrating this over (a, b) (and integrating by parts in the last term), we get
                                            4           4
                                                                            2            2
                                                                                               
   Ω(b) − Ω(a) ≥ −C ÊV (b − a) − C ÊV b 3(n+3) − a 3(n+3) − C ÊV D(b) 3(n+3) − D(a) 3(n+3)
                                                2                     Z b 2 ′
                                                  b Σ(b) a2 Σ(a)
                                                                                               
                                                                           r Σ (r) + 2rΣ(r)
                                       − C ÊV −           +         +                       dr .
                                                   D(b)        D(a)     a        D(r)

But now, recalling from Lemma 4.24 that Σ(r) ≤ CD(r) and rΣ′ (r) ≤ CD(r), this gives
                                                                     4
                                        Ω(b) − Ω(a) ≥ −C ÊV b 3(n+3)

(where again we have used D(r) ≤ C Ê2V r2 ); here, C = C(V). But this is exactly (⋆), and hence we
have completed the proof.                                                                         □

Next, we use Theorem 4.27 to establish a fixed lower bound on the center manifold frequency. In
fact, we will be able to show that if ε2 = ε2 (V) is sufficiently small, then I(r) ≥ 1/2 for all r (the
choice of a lower bound is 1/2 is arbitrary, and a lower bound of 1 − η could be achieved provided
ε2 is allowed to depend on η ∈ (0, 1) as well).

Corollary 4.28 (Uniform Frequency Lower Bound). Provided ε2 = ε2 (V) is sufficiently small, we
have I(r) ≥ 1/2 for all r > 0.

Proof. Firstly, note that I(r) > 0 for all r > 0: indeed, we have already shown that H(r) > 0
always, and by a similar argument21 we have that D(r) > 0. Moreover, I(r) is clearly continuous
in r > 0.
Now suppose for contradiction that there was a radius r̃ > 0 such that I(r̃) < 1/2. Then provided
ε2 = ε2 (V) ∈ (0, 1) is sufficiently small, Theorem 4.27 gives that for all 0 < r ≤ r̃ < 1,
                                              4                             
                                           3(n+3)                          1    7
                          I(r) ≤ eC ÊV r̃        (1 + I(r̃)) < eC ÊV 1 +     < .
                                                                           2    4

We just need to contradict this to complete the proof. To this end, we return to our first variation
estimates (the reader should note the similarity of the present argument with that in Corollary 3.4
for planar frequency). From (4.8) and (4.11) we see
                                                                         3
                                                                         X
                         H′ (r) − 2r−1 D(r) = O(1)ÊV H(r) − 2r−1              r2−n Erroj .
                                                                         j=1

Dividing this by H(r) (> 0) we get
                                                           3
                                                           X r2−n |Erroj |
                               H′ (r) 2I(r)
                                     −      ≤ C ÊV + 2r−1                 .
                               H(r)     r                      H(r)
                                                                  j=1

We now want to estimate the error terms Erroj in exactly the same way as before, but without using
any assumption regarding a lower bound on I(r). For example, in Lemma 4.25, the best bound we

21To see that D(r) > 0 for all r > 0, suppose for some r > 0 we had D(r) = 0. Then we would have |DN | = 0 on
Br (0). But then as 0 ∈ M ∩ spt∥V ∥ (from Lemma 4.13) we know |N (0)| = 0, and thus we would need to have |N | ≡ 0
on Br (0), i.e. V agrees with QJBr (0)K here. Hence, as M was C 3,1/2 , we see that 0 ∈ reg(V ), a contradiction.
                   BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                           87

can get is                                X
                                   Ê2V       ℓ(Li )n+2 inf φr ≤ Crn−2 D(r) + Crn Σ(r).
                                                         BLi
                                          i
Thus, using the first inequality in Lemma 4.24, we get
                               X
                          Ê2V    ℓ(Li )n+2 inf φr ≤ Crn−2 D(r) + Crn H(r).
                                                         BLi
                                          i

Similarly, we get
                                    2                           1                 1
                                ÊVn+3 sup ℓ(Li ) ≤ C rn−2 D(r) n+3 + C (rn H(r)) n+3 .
                                          i
Here, C = C(V). Using these bounds instead in our previous estimates on Erroj , we get

       3
                                                                    3             3
       X                                                                            
             r2−n |Erroj | ≤ C ÊV r2 (D(r) + H(r)) + C ÊV D(r) 4(n+3) + H(r) 4(n+3) (D(r) + r2 H(r))
       j=1

and thus we get
            3
            X r2−n |Erroj |                                               3             3
                                                                                            
                                ≤ C ÊV r2 I(r) + C ÊV r2 + C ÊV D(r) 4(n+3) + H(r) 4(n+3) (I(r) + r2 )
                       H(r)
            j=1

i.e.
                 3
                       r2−n |Erroj |
                                                                                                             
            −1
                 X                                                          3             3
                                                                                                      I(r)
       2r                            ≤ C ÊV rI(r) + C ÊV r + C ÊV D(r) 4(n+3) + H(r) 4(n+3)              +r .
                         H(r)                                                                           r
                 j=1

Now fix ε∗ > 0 to be chosen. Then, choose r∗ = r∗ (V, ε∗ ) ∈ (0, r̃) sufficiently small so that for
                                               3                       3
all r ∈ (0, r∗ ) we have CD(r) 4(n+3) < ε∗ , CH(r) 4(n+3) < ε∗ , and Cr∗ < ε∗ , where C = C(V)
is the constant from the above inequality (note that this is possible because D(r) ≤ C Ê2V r2 and
H(r) ≤ C Ê2V r4 , as 0 is a point of planar frequency ≥ 2, using also our estimates on ℘). The above
bound therefore becomes
                                         3
                                     −1
                                        X  r2−n |Erroj |         I(r)
                                  2r                     ≤ 3ε∗ ·      + 3ε∗
                                              H(r)                r
                                                   j=1

and hence we see
                                               H′ (r) 2I(r)             I(r)
                                                     −      ≤ C + 3ε∗ ·      .
                                               H(r)     r                r
Thus, we get
                                                   H′ (r)                    I(r)
                                                          ≤ C + (2 + 3ε∗ ) ·      .
                                                   H(r)                       r
Now, recall that we are supposing (as a result of our contradiction assumption) that I(r) < 7/4 for
all r ∈ (0, r∗ ) (as r∗ < r̃). Hence, we know
                                                7
                                     H′ (r)       (2 + 3ε∗ )
                                            ≤C+ 4                          for all r ∈ (0, r∗ ].
                                     H(r)            r
88                      BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

Integrating this over (r, r∗ ), we get
                                           
                                     H(r∗ )          7               r 
                                                                       ∗
                               log            ≤ Cr∗ + (2 + 3ε∗ ) log
                                     H(r)            4                r

i.e.                                                              r  7 (2+3ε∗ )
                                                  Cr∗               ∗    4
                                   H(r∗ ) ≤ e           H(r) ·                               for all r ∈ (0, r∗ ).
                                                                    r
In particular, we must have

                                   H(r)                             − 7 (2+3ε∗ )
                                   7            ≥ e−Cr∗ H(r∗ )r∗ 4                    >0         for all r ∈ (0, r∗ )
                                     (2+3ε∗ )
                               r   4


                        H(r)
i.e. lim inf r↓0    7               > 0. However, we know that H(r) ≤ C Ê2V r4 for all r ∈ (0, 1) (again, as the
                   r 4 (2+3ε∗ )
origin is a point of planar frequency ≥ 2, and moreover |℘|C 3 ≤ C ÊV with ℘(0) = 0, D℘(0) = 0,
by Lemma 4.13, and so |℘(x)| ≤ C ÊV |x|2 ). Thus, if we choose 74 (2 + 3ε∗ ) < 4, e.g. ε∗ = 1/21, we
get the desired contradiction and so complete the proof.                                            □


Remark 4.29. Currently, all our arguments have been based at the origin, i.e. defining the center
manifold frequency at 0. We can also base oursevles at different points of planar frequency ≥ 2
and the above arguments will also work, which allows us to define the center manifold frequency
function Iy (r) at different points of planar frequency ≥ 2. Corollary 4.28 applies at these other
base points as well, provided ε2 = ε2 (V) ∈ (0, 1) is sufficiently small, to provide a uniform lower
bound.

Now note that one can rerun the entire argument from Theorem 4.27 using the uniform lower
bound 1/2 provided by Corollary 4.28. Indeed, in the proof of Theorem 4.27 instead define Ω(r) :=
log(max{I(r), 1/2}) ≡ log I(r), and then the whole argument leading to (⋆) goes through, which in
                                         4
                                      3(n+3)
turn gives I(a) ≤ eC ÊV b                      I(b) for any 0 < a ≤ b < 1. Thus, we have now established:

Theorem 4.30 (Approximate Monotonicity of Center Manifold Frequency). If ε2 = ε2 (V) ∈ (0, 1)
is sufficiently small, then for any 0 < a ≤ b < 1,
                                                                                  4
                                                                        C ÊV b 3(n+3)
                                                          I(a) ≤ e                       I(b).

Here, C = C(V) ∈ (0, ∞).

In particular, we now get that the limit I(0) := limr↓0 I(r) must exist (and is ≥ 1/2 > 0). In fact,
the argument in Corollary 4.28 now gives, for any ε∗ > 0,

                                                                          H(r)
                                                            lim inf                   > 0.
                                                              r↓0       r2I(0)+ε∗

But then since H(r) ≤ C Ê2V r4 , we get that we need I(0) ≥ 2. We therefore have:

Corollary 4.31. If ε2 = ε2 (V) ∈ (0, 1) is sufficiently small, then I(0) ≥ 2.

Remark 4.32. In fact, one has I(0) ≥ N (0), i.e. the center manifold frequency is at least as large
as the planar frequency at the point. See Remark 4.39 for the justification. We note that it is
                   BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                                  89

entirely possible that I(0) = N (0), as is the case at any point where the planar frequency is not an
integer.

Remark 4.33. A more precise re-run of the proof of Corollary 4.28, using the lower bound provided
by Corollary 4.28 as well as Lemma 4.24 and (4.20) gives that, provided ε2 = ε2 (V) ∈ (0, 1) is
sufficiently small, for any 0 < r < R < 1,
                                    2(1−o(1))I(r)           2(1+o(1))I(R)
                                    R                 H(R)    R
                                                    ≤      ≤                  ,
                                    r                 H(r)    r

where o(1) denotes a term which → 0 as R → 0. Moreover, for any ε∗ > 0, for all r ∈ (0, 1)
sufficiently small (depending on ε∗ ) we also get:

                                                cr2I(0)+2ε∗ ≤ H(r) ≤ Cr2I(0)

where c = c(V, I(1)) and C = C(V, I(1)).

Note: Theorem 4.30 gives that for all r = r(V) sufficiently small, we have (for instance) I(r) ≥ 3/2.

These are the key facts we need to know regarding the center manifold frequency function in order
to conclude our argument. In particular, the approximate monotonicity of frequency provided by
Theorem 4.30, rather than the growth control given by Theorem 4.27, will allow us to show that
blow-ups relative to the center manifold are homogeneous of degree I(0).

We now prove that a certain reverse Poincaré inequality holds for the normal map N at appropriate
scales, thus controlling its full W 1,2 norm by its L2 norm at those scales.

Corollary 4.34 (Center Manifold Reverse Poincaré Inequality). If ε2 = ε2 (V) ∈ (0, 1) is suffi-
ciently small, then for every r ∈ (0, 1] there is s ∈ ( 32 r, 3r) such that
                                    Z                      Z
                                                     C
                                            |DN |2 ≤ 2             |N |2 .
                                     Bs (0)          s      Bs (0)

Here, C = C(V, I(4)) ∈ (0, ∞).


Proof. From the coarea formula we have
                                            Z                                           Z 3r        Z
                                                                        −1                 1
                     (3r)n−1
                               H(3r) ≡                           2d(p)          2
                                                                             |N | = 2                             |N |2
                                             B3r (0)\B3r/2 (0)                        3r/2 t            ∂Bt (0)

whereas, using Fubini’s theorem, we have
 Z 3r Z                       Z                  Z 3r
                                                                                    3r                  1
                   |DN |2 =        |DN (x)|2             1(|x|,∞) (t) dtdx =           · (3r)n−2 D(3r) ≡ (3r)n−1 D(3r).
   3r/2   Bt (0)               M                  3r/2                              2                   2

Now, the frequency upper bound I(r) ≤ C ∗ provided by Theorem 4.27 gives D(3r) ≤ C ∗ H(3r),
where C ∗ = C ∗ (V, I(4)). Hence, from the above equalities we see
                                    Z 3r Z                              Z 3r        Z
                                                           2        ∗         1
                                                     |DN | ≤ 4C                               |N |2 .
                                     3r/2   Bt (0)                       3r/2 t     ∂Bt (0)
90                   BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

Thus, basic measure theory tells us that there must exist s ∈ ( 32 r, 3r) with

                                                 4C ∗
                                 Z                    Z
                                              2
(4.25)                                   |DN | ≤            |N |2 .
                                  Bs (0)          s ∂Bs (0)

Now, fix any σ ∈ (s/2, s) and any point x ∈ ∂Bs (0). Consider the geodesic line γ ⊂ M passing
through 0 and x, and let γ̃ ⊂ γ be the arc having one endpoint on ∂Bσ (0) (call this endpoint x̃)
and the other endpoint x. By the fundamental theorem of calculus (applied to |N |2 ) we have
                                                     Z
                                      2          2
                               |N (x)| ≤ |N (x̃)| + 2 |DN ||N |.
                                                                       γ̃

Integrating this over x ∈ ∂Bs (0) we get
                      Z                Z                               Z
                             |N |2 ≤ C                     |N |2 + C                      |DN ||N |
                            ∂Bs (0)              ∂Bσ (0)                Bs (0)\Bs/2 (0)

where we have used that σ > s/2 and so Bs (0) \ Bσ (0) ⊂ Bs (0) \ Bs/2 (0) in the last term; here,
C = C(V) only depends on the curvature of M and so is controlled by ∥D℘∥C 2 ≤ C(V). If we
further integrate this over σ ∈ (s/2, s) we get
                    Z                Z                           Z
                  s             2                          2
                            |N | ≤ C                   |N | + Cs                  |DN ||N |.
                  2 ∂Bs (0)            Bs (0)\Bs/2 (0)            Bs (0)\Bs/2 (0)


Using 2ab ≤ a2 + b2 for suitable a, b ∈ R, we get

                                                               s2
                   Z                 Z                              Z
                 s            2                            2
                          |N | ≤ C                     |N | +     ∗
                                                                                     |DN |2
                2 ∂Bs (0)              Bs (0)\Bs/2 (0)        16C    Bs (0)\Bs/2 (0)

where C ∗ is as in (4.25). Substituting this into (4.25) and rearranging, we get
                                Z                   Z
                                              2  C
                                         |DN | ≤ 2                 |N |2
                                  Bs (0)         s Bs (0)\Bs/2 (0)

which proves the result.                                                                                          □

Remark 4.35. We note that if one takes in place of φr a more general test function in the outer
and inner variations relative to the center manifold ((4.10), (4.12)) we can analogously control the
error terms to show:
              Z                Q
                               X
                   φ|DN |2 +          Ni DNi · Dφ = o(1)∥φ∥C 1 ∥N ∥2W 1,2             for φ ∈ Cc∞ (B1n (0));
                               i=1
          Z
                  |DN |2 − 2Di N Dj N Di φj = o(1)∥φ∥C 1 ∥N ∥2W 1,2                 for φ ∈ Cc∞ (B1n (0); Rn );
                                     


where o(1) denotes a term which → 0 as ÊV → 0.

4.4. Center manifold blow-up and conclusion. We are now in a position to perform our blow-
up/linearisation procedure relative to the center manifold M from Theorem 4.12. Again, we have
fixed constants M0 = M0 (V), N0 = N0 (V, M0 ), Ce = Ce (V, M0 , N0 ), Ch = Ch (V, M0 , N0 , Ce ), and
                BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                                     91

ε2 = ε2 (V, M0 , N0 , Ce , Ch ) such that all the previous results of the section hold. In particular,
ε2 = ε2 (V) only depends on V.

Recall that V ∈ V is such that 0 ∈ BV≥2 is a density Q branch point with planar frequency ≥ 2 and
whose (unique) tangent cone is Q|P0 |; this is of course without loss of generality,
                                                                               √ by translating
and rotating V . Moreover, by rescaling V we may also assume that at scale 6 n the conclusions
of the previous sections hold. Let M be the corresponding center manifold given by Theorem 4.12,
with N the associated normal map representing V over M, given by Theorem 4.16.

Now, take any sequence rj ↓ 0, and let sj ∈ ( 32 rj , 3rj ) be the radius from Corollary 4.34 corre-
sponding to rj . Consider the rescaled sequences

                                       Vj := (η0,sj )# V,         Mj := η0,sj (M),

and Nj : Mj → AQ (Rn+k ) given by Nj (p) := s−1
                                              j N (sj p). Clearly from the uniqueness of the
tangent cone to V at 0 we have Vj ⇀ Q|P0 |, and moreover from the bounds in Theorem 4.12
(cf. Lemma 4.13) we know that Mj → P0 in C 3,1/2 . Now, we define a sequence of blow-up maps
Njb : B1n (0) → AQ (Rn+k ) by

                                        Njb (x) := ∥Nj ∥−1
                                                        L2 (B1 (0))
                                                                    · Nj (expj (x))

where expj : B1n (0) → Mj is the exponential map at 0 ∈ Mj (here we have identified the domain
B1n (0) with the unit ball in T0 Mj ∼= Rn ). We also know from the estimates in Theorem 4.12 that
expj converges in C  2,1/2 to the identity map B1n (0) → B1n (0).

From the center manifold reverse Poincaré inequality (Corollary 4.34) we know that

                                                    ∥Njb ∥W 1,2 (B1 ) ≤ C

i.e. Njb is uniformly bounded in W 1,2 . In particular, up to passing to a subsequence, we know
that Njb converge to a W 1,2 function N b : B1n (0) → AQ (Rk ), where the convergence is strongly
                                   1,2
in L2loc (B1n (0)) and weakly in Wloc  (B1n (0))22. Notice that the limit N b is valued a.e. in AQ (Rk ),
                        ⊥
i.e. taking values in P0 rather than just Rn+k . This is readily seen from Theorem 4.12 and Lemma
4.13, since T0 M = P0 and thus Mj → P0 in C 3 (as a graph) in B1n+k (0), meaning that the normal
bundle to Mj converges to uniformly to {0}n × Rk in B1n+k (0).

Remark 4.36. In particular, from the approximate monotonicity of the frequency function over
M as shown in Theorem 4.30, we get ∥N b ∥L2 (Bρn (0)) ≥ C(V, V, ρ) > 0 for each ρ ∈ (0, 1) (this is just
blowing-up the equivalent bounds one gets from having a monotone frequency function equivalent
to those seen in Corollary 3.4 for planar frequency).

We now give two methods of how to conclude Theorem A, depending on whether one can upgrade
                                                                1,2
the above convergence of Njb to N b to strong convergence in Wloc   (B1n (0)) or not. We note that
strong convergence is known when V is the varifold corresponding to an area minimising current, or
an area minimising current mod p (this follows from the arguments in [DLS16b, Proof of Theorem
6.2] and [DLHMS20, Proof of Theorem 28.2] respectively).


22By this we mean that if ξ : A (Rk ) → RL is Almgren’s bi-Lipschitz embedding [Alm00] (here, L = L(n, k, Q) ∈ Z )
                               Q                                                                                ≥1
                                   1,2
then ξ ◦ Njb → ξ ◦ N b weakly in Wloc  (B1n (0); RL ), where N b is the strong L2loc (B1n (0); AQ (Rk ))-limit of Njb .
92               BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

Remark 4.37. We do not rule out the possibility that one can unconditionally prove strong
                  1,2
convergence in Wloc   (B1n (0)) in our setting. One might be able to do this using our ε-regularity
property and estimates coming from the first variation (adapted to M) in an analogous manner to
that seen in Appendix A.

4.4.1. When there is energy convergence to center manifold blow-up. Suppose we are in a situation
                                                            1,2
where we can in fact show that Njb → N b strongly in Wloc       (B1n (0)). We then claim that the
frequency function associated to N b , namely

                                                         D(ρ)
                                               I(ρ) :=        ,
                                                         H(ρ)

is monotone increasing in ρ, where
                        Z                                                         Z
          D(ρ) := ρ2−n φ(r/ρ)|DN b |2              and          H(ρ) := ρ1−n           φ′ (r/ρ)r−1 |N b |2 ;

here, φ is the Lipschitz cut-off function from Section 3. To see this, if we write Dj (ρ), Hj (ρ), Ej (ρ),
Σj (ρ), and Gj (ρ) for the relevant frequency quantities of Njb as in Section 4.3, we have (cf. (4.21),
(4.22), (4.23))

(4.26)                             |H′j (ρ) − 2ρ−1 Ej (ρ)| ≤ C ÊVj Hj (ρ);

                                                                   2
                                                             1+ 3(n+3)
(4.27)                 |Dj (ρ) − Ej (ρ)| ≤ C ÊVj Dj (ρ)                 + C Ê2Vj ρ2 Σj (ρ);


                                                                                 2                    2
                                                                           1+ 3(n+3)
(4.28)       |D′j (ρ) − 2Gj (ρ)| ≤ C ÊVj Dj (ρ) + C ÊVj ρ−1 Dj (ρ)                   + C ÊVj Dj3(n+3) D′j (ρ)

where here C = C(V, V ) (all the estimates on the center manifold scale appropriately to give
bounds in terms of ÊVj ). Thus, if we divide these quantities by ∥Nj ∥2L2 (B1 (0)) and take j → ∞, we
                        1,2
get, using the strong Wloc  (B1n (0)) convergence Njb → N b and that ÊVj → 0,
                                                               Z
                           H′ (ρ) = 2ρ−1 E(ρ) ≡ −2ρ−n              φ′ (r/ρ)N b Dr N b ;
                                                         Z
                              D(ρ) = E(ρ) ≡ −ρ1−n              φ′ (r/ρ)N b Dr N b ;
                                                           Z
                               ′                      −n
                             D (ρ) = 2G(ρ) ≡ −2ρ               rφ′ (r/ρ)|Dr N b |2 .

In particular, we see that H(ρ) > 0 for all ρ > 0, else we would get φ′ (r/ρ)N b ≡ QJ0K, giving that
D(ρ) = E(ρ) = 0, and so N b is constant on Bρ (0). But as N b ≡ QJ0K on Bρ (0)\Bρ/2 (0), we therefore
have that N b ≡ QJ0K on Bρ (0). But then this would contradict ∥N b ∥L2 (Bρ (0)) ≥ C(V, V, ρ) > 0
from Remark 4.36 and the strong L2 convergence.

From the above identities, we easily compute

               d             D′ (ρ)H(ρ) − H′ (ρ)D(ρ)     G(ρ)H(ρ) − ρ−1 E(ρ)2
                  log I(ρ) =                         =2·                      ≥0
               dρ                   D(ρ)H(ρ)                  D(ρ)H(ρ)
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                   93

where in the last inequality we have used Cauchy–Schwarz. Thus, we get I(σ) ≤ I(ρ) for every
0 < σ ≤ ρ < 1.

Notice also that, even though the above computations are based at 0, they also hold at any point
x which is a limit point in B1n (0) of density Q branch points (or flat singular points) xi of planar
frequency ≥ 2 in Vji (as the corresponding computations over M also hold); this allows us to define
the frequency function Ix (ρ) at any such point x. We then define Ix (0) := limρ↓0 Ix (ρ), which
is well-defined at such x by the above monotonicity. We can then also deduce from the above
computation of monotonicity all the usual facts regarding Ix (ρ), such as:

    (i) if I0 (ρ) is constant on an interval [a, b], then N b is homogeneous on [a, b] of degree the
        constant value of I(ρ) on [a, b];

   (ii) if N b is homogeneous of degree α, then its spine S(N b ) (i.e. the set of points under which
        N b is translation invariant) is a subspace, which moreover is given by

                                    S(N b ) = {x : Ix (0) = I0 (0)}.


Furthermore, because we are blowing-up a sequence of rescalings of a given V about the fixed point
                                                         1,2
0, it is easy to verify from the strong convergence in Wloc  (B1n (0)) as well as the approximate almost
monotonicity of I(ρ) (Theorem 4.30), in the same manner as that seen in Section 3, that

                                I0 (ρ) = I(0)     for every ρ ∈ (0, 1),

i.e. the frequency value of N b at 0 always agrees with the center manifold frequency of V at 0, and
moreover I0 (ρ) is constant in ρ. Hence, N b must be a homogeneous function of degree I(0) ≥ 2
(from Corollary 4.31). In particular, its spine S(N b ) is a subspace, and dim(S(N b )) ̸∈ {n − 1, n}
as I0 (0) ∈ [2, ∞), and so dim(S(N b )) ≤ n − 2.

Remark 4.38. We have shown that, even if the blow-up depends on the subsequence we passed to,
its degree of homogeneity does not. At present this all depends on the choice of center manifold: we
can in fact show that both the degree of homogeneity, as well as the blow-up itself, are independent
of the choice of center manifold. Indeed, let M be a choice of center manifold for V (at 0). Let
N denote the normal map of V relative to M and I(0) the frequency of V relative to M at 0.
Recalling Remark 4.33, for every ε∗ > 0 there exists r∗ > 0 such that for all r ∈ (0, r∗ ),

                                     cr2I(0)+2ε∗ ≤ H(r) ≤ Cr2I(0)

for some constants c, C ∈ (0, ∞) independent of ε∗ and r. Thus, after summing over suitable
dyadic-like scales (cf. the proof of Corollary 3.4):
                                                 Z
                                   n+2I(0)+2ε∗
(4.29)                          cr             ≤     |N |2 ≤ Crn+2I(0)
                                                 Br (0)


for all r ∈ (0, r∗ ). Now, suppose M
                                   f is a different choice of center manifold. Let eI(0) denote the
frequency value of V relative to M, and suppose for contradiction that I(0) < eI(0). Since the
                                   f
Hausdorff distance of spt∥V ∥ to both M and M  f is small, we can express Mf as a normal graph of
a single-valued function ψ over M. It follows from (4.29) with M  f in place of M as well as that
94                  BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

G(N, QJbK) is minimised at b = Na that:
                         Z              Z
(4.30)                         |Nf |2 ≤                     G(N, QJψK)2 ≤ Crn+2I(0)
                                                                                    e

                                  Br (0)           Br (0)

for all r ∈ (0, r∗ ), where Nf is the average-free part of the normal map of N , and Br (0) denote
geodesic balls in M. Now let rj → 0+ and sj ∈ (3rj /2, 3rj ) be the corresponding radii from
Corollary 4.34 for the center manifold M. After passing to a subsequence, let N b be the blow-up
of (η0,sj )# V relative to η0,sj (M). Dividing both sides of (4.30) with r = sj by s−n−2
                                                                                    j    ∥N ∥2L2 (Bs (0))
                                                                                                                    j
and letting j → ∞, we deduce that the average-free part of N b must vanish, contradicting the fact
that N b is non-zero and average-free. Thus, we must have I(0) ≥ eI(0), and so by symmetry that
I(0) = eI(0). This shows that the frequency value is independent of the center manifold.
To see further that the blow-up itself is independent of the center manifold23, let N
                                                                                    e b be the blow-up
of (η0,sj )# V relative to η0,sj (M
                                  f). By similar reasoning to the above, Ne b arises as the strong L2
limit
                                  N (exp(sj x)) − ψ(exp(sj x))   e b (x).
                                     −n/2
                                                               →N
                                    sj    ∥N − ψ∥L2 (Bsj (0))

Taking the average-free part in this limit, and noting that both N b and N        e b are non-zero and
                               b
average-free, we see that γN = N     b
                                   e , where γ = limj→∞ ∥N ∥L2 (B (0)) /∥N − ψ∥L2 (B (0)) ∈ (0, ∞).
                                                                      sj                 sj

But since ∥N ∥L2 (B n (0)) = ∥N ∥L2 (B n (0)) = 1 it follows that γ = 1, and thus N = N b , as claimed.
              b
                        1
                              e  b
                                            1
                                                                                  e b


Remark 4.39. The proof that the center manifold frequency value I(0) is independent of the
choice of center manifold can also be used to verify Remark 4.32 that I(0) ≥ N (0). Indeed, given a
center manifold M, express the plane P0 as a normal graph of a single-valued function ψ over M.
Then the argument leading to (4.30) now gives
                           Z             Z
                                      2
                                 |Nf | ≤       G(N, QJψK)2 ≤ Crn+2N (0)
                                 Br (0)            Br (0)

using Corollary 3.4. Now if N (0) > I(0) one performs the analogous blow-up as in Remark 4.38
to see that again N b must vanish, giving the same contradiction as before. Hence I(0) ≥ N (0).
Notice that this argument cannot be used to show the other inequality, as all the corresponding
argument would give is that if I(0) > N (0) then the blow-up off the plane must have vanishing
average-free part, which is not necessarily a contradiction as it is entirely possible that the blow-up
off the plane would coincide with its average-part (with multiplicity Q). Notice that this can only
happen when N (0) is an integer, and so if N (0) is not an integer then we do get a contradiction
and thus need to have I(0) = N (0). In fact, the argument in Remark 4.38 (showing that the
blow-up itself is independent of the choice of center manifold) also shows that whenever the coarse
blow-up has vanishing average, then the coarse blow-up off the plane agrees with the blow-up off
the center manifold. In particular, this happens at every point where the planar frequency is non-
integer, showing that no extra information at the level of tangent maps is gained at such points
from blowing-up relative to the center manifold compared to the tangent plane (cf. Proposition
3.7).

Finally, in an analogous manner to that seen in Corollary 3.6 we have upper semi-continuity of
frequency along the blow-up sequence, in the following sense: suppose x ∈ {0}k × B1n (0) is such
23Note that this is not saying that the blow-up itself is unique, i.e. independent of the choice of scales, but only that
for a given choice of scales, the blow-up does not depend on the choice of center manifold.
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                    95

that there exist points Xj ∈ BV≥2
                                j
                                  with Xj → x (in Rn+k ), then

                                        Ix (0) ≥ lim sup IXj (0).
                                                  j→∞

Again, here we using Lemma 4.13 to know that Vj and Mj touch at such Xj .

We are now ready to conclude the proof of Theorem A by showing that dimH (BV≥2 ∩ {ΘV =
Q}) ≤ n − 2. Notice first that, as BV≥2 is a closed set, by a simple covering argument it suffices
to show that at every point X ∈ BV≥2 with ΘV (X) = Q, there is a radius ρX > 0 such that
dimH (BV≥2 ∩ {ΘV = Q} ∩ BρX (X)) ≤ n − 2.

Thus, fix a point X ∈ BV≥2 with ΘV (X) = Q: by translating and rotating, we can without loss
of generality assume that X = 0 and the (unique) tangent cone to V at X is Q|{0} × Rn |. We
may also rescale about X = 0 to assume that, on B6n+k
                                                    √ (0), all the prior results in Section 4 hold.
                                                      n
Thus, from Theorem 4.12 we may choose a center manifold M which touches V at all points in
BV≥2 ∩ B1n+k (0); we fix such a choice M from now on. At every Y ∈ BV≥2 ∩ B1n+k (0), there is then
an associated frequency value of V relative to M, which we denote by IM V (Y ).

The blow-up analysis of V relative to M above then applies at every such point Y . As such, we
may stratify BV≥2 ∩ B1n+k (0) based on the maximal spine dimension of the blow-ups we get in this
manner. So, set for ℓ ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n − 2},

 SℓM := {Y ∈ BV≥2 ∩ B1n+k (0) : dim(S(N b )) ≤ ℓ for every blow-up N b of V relative to M at Y }.

Here, we have included the superscript M to emphasise that this stratification could depend on
the choice of M. Clearly we have

                              S0M ⊂ S1M ⊂ · · · ⊂ Sn−2
                                                   M
                                                       = BV≥2 ∩ B1n+k (0)

where the last equality follows from the discussion above.
It therefore suffices to prove that dimH (SjM ) ≤ j for each j = 0, 1, . . . , n − 2. But because we
have upper semi-continuity of the frequency along the blow-up sequence, this forces points of
high frequency compared to the base point to accumulate around the spine of the blow-up, which
has dimension at most j if the base point is in Sj . Thus, we may conclude dimH (SjM ) ≤ j in
an analogous manner to that seen in Section 3 using the weak linear approximation property of
Almgren. This therefore completes the proof of Theorem A in the case where we have local energy
convergence during the center manifold blow-up procedure.

4.4.2. When energy convergence to the center manifold blow-up is not readily available. In this
situation, we instead use the theory of multi-valued gradient Young measures introduced by Hirsch–
Spolaor [HS24]. We summarise the theory, following [HS24], in Appendix B. Here, we shall use the
results in Appendix B to prove Theorem A.
As in Section 4.4.1, we still have the identities (4.26), (4.27), and (4.28). Thus, consider Ej := EN b ,
                                                                                                       j
the elementary Young measure associated to Njb . Since (Njb )j is uniformly bounded in W 1,2 (B1 ),
the (Ej )j are uniformly bounded in Y Q , and thus by Proposition B.4 we can find F ∈ Y Q and a
subsequence such that Ej ⇀ F as Q-Young measures; in particular, F ∈ grad Y Q . Dividing again
(4.26), (4.27), and (4.28) by ∥Nj ∥2L2 (B1 (0)) , Proposition B.4 combined with Remark 4.35 tells us
that F is stationary. Remark 4.36 again gives that the associated map f ∈ W 1,2 (B1 (0); AQ (Rk ))
96               BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

to F given by Proposition B.7 obeys f ̸≡ 0 on B1 (0) (in fact, the proof of Proposition B.7 gives
that f = N b ).

Just as in Section 4.4.1, since the blow-up was constructed by a sequence of rescalings of a given
V about a fixed point, it is easy to verify that

                                I(0, ρ) := I(0)      for every ρ ∈ (0, 1),

and thus by Proposition B.14, we see that F must be homogeneous. Proposition B.15 then guaran-
tees that the points of maximal frequency in F belong to a subspace, which as I(0, ρ) = I(0) ≥ 2,
must be a subspace of dimension ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n − 2} by Proposition B.16. But now one can con-
clude in an analogous manner to that in Section 4.4.1, namely to stratify BV≥2 ∩ B1n+k (0) by the
maximal spine dimension of the blow-up one achieves through this procedure, and using upper
semi-continuity of the frequency along the blow-up sequence to show that nearby points of good
frequency relative to the chosen base point must accumulate along the spine of the blow-up, from
which standard measure theory again allows us to control the size. This therefore completes the
proof of Theorem A in this case also, thereby also completing its proof.                       □



                 Appendix A. Energy Convergence for Coarse Blow-Ups
In this appendix we verify that Definition 1.2 guarantees energy convergence to coarse blow-ups,
                                 1,2
and thus strong convergence in Wloc  (B1n (0)). In fact, we prove the following:

Theorem A.1. Let (Vj )∞ j=1 be a sequence of stationary integral n-varifolds and Ej ↓ 0 be such that
for some Lipschitz Q-valued functions uj : B1n (0) → AQ (Rk ) we have

                           Vj = v(uj )      and       sup |uj | + Lip(uj ) ≤ Ej .

Let v : B1n (0) → AQ (Rk ) be a Lipschitz Q-valued function such that Ej−1 uj → v locally uniformly
in B1n (0). Then, for each σ ∈ (0, 1),
                                     Z
                                lim         Ej−2 |Duj |2 − |Dv|2 = 0.
                                 j→∞ B n (0)
                                      σ

                                         1,2
In particular, Ej−1 uj → v strongly in Wloc  (B1n (0)).

Note: We do not require (for instance) that Ej = ÊVj .


Proof. We shall proceed by induction on Q. By a standard covering argument, we may assume that
σ = 1/2. In the base case Q = 1, by standard elliptic estimates we have ∥uj ∥C 3 (B n (0)) ≤ C(n, k)Ej ,
                                                                                    3/4

and thus we get the stronger conclusion that Ej−1 Duj → Dv uniformly in B1/2
                                                                         n (0).


Let us now suppose that the theorem holds true whenever we replace Q with Q′ ∈ {1, 2, . . . , Q − 1}.
Let Vj and uj be as in the statement of the lemma. By the Rellich compactness theorem, Ej−1 uκ,α
                                                                                               j   →
  κ,α             1,2   n
v     weakly in Wloc (B1 (0)), implying that

                            ∥Dv∥L2 (B n (0)) ≤ lim inf Ej−1 ∥Duj ∥L2 (B n (0)) .
                                      1/2         j→∞                    1/2
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                       97

Hence it suffices to prove

                             lim sup Ej−1 ∥Duj ∥L2 (B n (0)) ≤ ∥Dv∥L2 (B n (0)) .
                                                         1/2                  1/2
                              j→∞

Now, arguing as in [BKMW25, (B6)], for any δ > 0 we get that for all j sufficiently large,
                             Q Z
                             X
(A.1)                                                     |Ej−1 Duj − Dva |2 ≤ Cδ
                                    n (0)∩{|v α −v |<δ}
                                   B1/2
                             α=1                  a



where C = C(n, k, Q) ∈ (0, ∞) is a constant.




               n
Now let ξ ∈ B 1/2 (0) ∩ {|v α − va | ≥ δ}. Then

                                                      N
                                                      X
                                             v(ξ) =         Qα Jv α (ξ)K
                                                      α=1

where N ≥ 2, Q1 , . . . , QN ≥ 1 are integers such that N                       1              N       k
                                                            P
                                                               α=1 Qα = Q, and v (ξ), . . . , v (ξ) ∈ R are
distinct. Let
                              s := min{|v α (ξ) − v β (ξ)| : 1 ≤ α < β ≤ N }.
                                               n           o
Recall that Lip v|B1/2n (ξ)   ≤ 1. Let ρ := min 14 , 6√s Q . Then

                                                         N
                                                         X
                                               v(x) =          ṽ α (x)
                                                         α=1

on Bρn (ξ) where ṽ α : Bρn (ξ) → AQα (Rk ) are Lipschitz Qα -valued functions such that

                                         G(ṽ α (x), Qα Jv α (ξ)K) < s/6.

Since Ej−1 uj → v uniformly on B7/8
                                n (0), for all sufficiently large j we can write


                                                          N
                                                          X
                                              uj (x) =          ũαj (x)
                                                          α=1

on Bρn (ξ), where ũαj : Bρn (ξ) → AQα (Rk ) is a Lipschitz Qα -valued function such that

                                      G(Ej−1 ũαj (x), Qα Jv α (ξ)K) < s/3.

It follows that sup |ũαj | + Lip(ũαj ) ≤ Ej . By the Arzelà–Ascoli theorem, Ej−1 ũαj → ṽ α uniformly on
Bρn (ξ). Since Qα < Q, by the induction hypothesis we have
                                         Z
                                   lim           Ej−2 |Dũαj |2 − |Dṽ α |2 = 0
                                   j→∞ B n (ξ)
                                        ρ
98                   BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

for each α ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }, and therefore
                                         Z
                                     lim             Ej−2 |Duj |2 − |Dv|2 = 0.
                                       j→∞ B n (ξ)
                                            ρ

                                                                                      n
By a standard covering argument based on the compactness of B 1/2 (0) ∩ {|v α − va | ≥ δ}, we
therefore get
                                 Q Z
                                 X
(A.2)                      lim                                   Ej−2 |Duj |2 − |Dv|2 = 0.
                           j→∞           n (0)∩{|v α −v |≥δ}
                                        B1/2           a
                                 α=1


Since Ej−1 uκ,α
            j   → v κ,α weakly in Wloc1,2
                                          (B1n (0)) and (A.2) implies that Ej−2 |Duκ,α 2
                                                                                   j | → |Dv
                                                                                             κ,α |2
              1  n           α
strongly in L (B1/2 (0) ∩ {|v − va | ≥ δ}), we thus get

               Q Z                                                     Q Z
                                            |Ej−1 Duκ,α
               X                                                       X
(A.3)    lim                                        j   − Dvaκ |2 =                                   |Dv κ,α − Dvaκ |2
        j→∞           n (0)∩{|v α −v |≥δ}
                     B1/2           a
                                                                                n (0)∩{|v α −v |≥δ}
                                                                               B1/2           a
               α=1                                                     α=1

for each κ ∈ {1, . . . , k}. Therefore, for all sufficiently large j we get by (A.1) and (A.3):
        Q Z                                          Q Z
                       |Ej−1 Duκ,α                                               |Ej−1 Duκ,α
        X                                            X
                               j   − Dvaκ |2 ≤                                           j   − Dvaκ |2
             n                                         n          α
        α=1 B1/2 (0)                              α=1 B1/2 (0)∩{|v −va |<δ}
                                                            Q Z
                                                                                           |Ej−1 Duκ,α
                                                            X
                                                        +                                          j   − Dvaκ |2
                                                                 n          α
                                                            α=1 B1/2 (0)∩{|v −va |≥δ}
                                                           Q Z
                                                           X
                                                ≤ Cδ +                                    |Dv κ,α − Dvaκ |2
                                                                n          α
                                                           α=1 B1/2 (0)∩{|v −va |≥δ}
                                                           Q Z
                                                           X
                                                ≤ Cδ +                     |Dv κ,α − Dvaκ |2
                                                                   n (0)
                                                                  B1/2
                                                           α=1

for each κ ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k}, where C = C(n, k, Q) ∈ (0, ∞) is a constant. Hence, taking lim supj→∞
of both sides and letting δ ↓ 0, we get
                           Q Z                                        Q Z
                                          |Ej−1 Duκ,α
                           X                                          X
                 lim sup                          j   − Dvaκ |2 ≤                     |Dv κ,α − Dvaκ |2
                     j→∞          n (0)
                                 B1/2                                         n (0)
                                                                             B1/2
                           α=1                                        α=1

for each κ ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k}. Since Ej−1 uκ,α
                                            j   → v κ,α weakly in W 1,2 (B1n (0)), this then gives that
(summing over κ ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k} also)

                                   k   Q Z                  k   Q Z
                                                     κ,α 2
                                  XX                       XX
                               −2
                      lim sup Ej                  |Duj | ≤                 |Dv κ,α |2 .
                        j→∞               B n (0)                  B n (0)
                                  κ=1 α=1  1/2             κ=1 α=1  1/2


This gives us the desired upper semi-continuity, which completes the proof.                                               □
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                    99

                  Appendix B. Multi-Valued Gradient Young Measures
Here we provide an exposition of the multi-valued gradient Young measures introduced by Hirsch–
Spolaor [HS24]. We also provide further structural information regarding homogeneous multi-valued
gradient Young measures. Much of this appendix is included within [HS24] although there are some
differences as, for instance, we avoid the need to discuss slicings of homogeneous gradient Young
measures.

The classical theory of Young measures provides a way of associating a limit to a bounded sequence
of functions (fj )j ⊂ L∞ (B1n (0); Rk ) where the limit of φ(fj ) is determined for every continuous
function φ : Rk → R. For instance, if the fj oscillate a lot, the limiting Young measure represents
the asymptotic statistical distribution of the values of the fj near each point.

For us, we are interested in limits of sequences (fj )j of W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk )) functions as (Young)
measures which keep track of the action of certain functions of the form φ(x, fj , Dfj , Dfj ⊗ Dfj ),
in particular those determining the inner and outer variations needed to prove the monotonicity of
a frequency function (keeping track of every such continuous φ is not possible now as we only have
W 1,2 control on the sequence). The aim is that whilst the usual weak W 1,2 limit may or may not
have a monotone frequency function, the associated Young measure (which is related to the weak
W 1,2 limit but contains more information) will have a notion of frequency which is monotone that
we can make use of.

To this end, we introduce the vector space
                                                          2
                             V := Rk × Rk×n × R(k×n) ≡ V1 × V2 × V3 .

Write (y, p, M ) ∈ V for the corresponding coordinates on V adapted to V1 , V2 , V3 . One should
think of y, p, M as playing the roles of f (x), Df (x), Df (x) ⊗ Df (x), respectively, for a function
f : B1n (0) → Rk .

Let us begin by introducing a class of test functions which W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk )) naturally acts on.
Write Ce for the set of continuous functions φ : B1n (0) × V → R which obey:

     • spt(φ) ⊂ K × V for some compact set K ⊂ B1n (0);

     • ∥φ∥∗ < ∞, where
                                                       |φ(x, y, p, M )|
                                ∥φ∥∗ := sup                2∗      2
                                                                         .
                                            x,y,p,M 1 + |y| + |p| + |M |


Here, for n > 2 we take 2∗ := n−2
                                2n
                                   to be the Sobolev conjugate of 2, and if n = 2 we can take 2∗ to
be any (fixed) number we wish in (2, ∞), e.g. 2∗ = 3. The important properties that we will need
2∗ to satisfy is that 2∗ > 2 and we have the compact Sobolev embedding W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk )) ,→
  ∗
L2 (B1n (0)) (which in our context follows from, e.g. [DLS11, Proposition 2.11]).

The reader should note that (C,  e ∥ · ∥∗ ) is a non-separable normed vector space (due to the non-
compactness of the support in the V-variables). Nonetheless, a function f ∈ W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk ))
naturally gives rise to a linear map Ef : Ce → R, called the elementary Young measure associated to
f , by
                              Z     XQ
                   Ef (φ) :=            φ(x, f α (x), Df α (x), Df α (x) ⊗ Df α (x)) dx.
                              B1n (0) α=1
100              BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

This is well-defined by definition of Ce and Sobolev embedding. In general, for a linear map F : Ce →
R we define its corresponding operator norm by

                             ∥F∥∗ := sup{F(φ) : φ ∈ Ce such that ∥φ∥∗ ≤ 1}.
                                                                                                         ∗
Notice then that for f ∈ W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk )) we have (using the Sobolev embedding W 1,2 ,→ L2 )
                                                                  ∗
                  ∥f ∥2W 1,2 (B n (0)) ≤ ∥Ef ∥∗ ≤ Qωn + ∥f ∥2W 1,2 (B n (0)) + 2∥f ∥2W 1,2 (B n (0)) .
                              1                                           1                    1


Thus, (fj )j ⊂ W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk )) is a uniformly bounded sequence if and only if (Efj )j is uni-
formly bounded. However, since (C,  e ∥·∥∗ ) is non-separable, we cannot apply the sequential Banach–
Alaoglu theorem in this space to always find a subsequential limit of a uniformly bounded sequence.
In order to resolve this issue, we will restrict the functions in Ce we act on so that the vector space
of functions we act on is separable. Indeed, ultimately we are most interested in the limits coming
from the inner and outer variations, which correspond to the choices

                      φ1 (x, y, p, M ) := pκi y κ ∂i φ + Miiκκ φ         for φ ∈ Cc∞ (B1n (0)),

                 φ2 (x, y, p, M ) := (2Mijκκ − δij Mℓℓ
                                                    κκ
                                                       )∂i φj             for φ ∈ Cc∞ (B1n (0); Rn ).
Here, i, j, ℓ ∈ {1, . . . , n} and κ ∈ {1, . . . , k}. Note that both φ1 , φ2 ∈ C,
                                                                                e but even more so they have
the property that, as (y, p, M ) → ∞, the limiting behaviour of these functions (up to lower order
terms determined by the scaling in the norm ∥ · ∥∗ ) is determined entirely by functions of (x, M )
in a uniform manner. More precisely, if we set

                φ∞
                 1 (x, M ) := φ1 (x, 0, 0, M )           and          φ∞
                                                                       2 (x, M ) := φ2 (x, 0, 0, M ),

then we have
                                       |φi (x, y, p, M ) − φ∞i (x, M )|
                      lim         sup              2 ∗     2
                                                                        =0             for i = 1, 2.
                  (y,p,M )→∞ x∈B n (0)
                                1
                                           1 + |y| + |p| + |M |

The reader should note that this is why we require the exponent of 2∗ > 2 in the power of |y| in
the definition of ∥ · ∥∗ , to ensure this limiting behaviour is true for the inner variation φ1 .

This offers a subclass of functions in Ce which is separable (as we have essentially compactified the
behaviour in the V-variables) and contains the functions we care about. We therefore define:

Definition B.1. Write C(B1n (0) × V) for the set of functions φ ∈ Ce for which there is a continuous
function φ∞ = φ∞ (x, M ) : B1n (0) × V3 → R which is 1-homogeneous in the M -variable and obeys:

                                                 |φ(x, y, p, M ) − φ∞ (x, M )|
                                  lim      sup              2∗ + |p|2 + |M |
                                                                               = 0.
                            (y,p,M )→∞ x∈B n (0)
                                          1
                                                    1 + |y|

We call φ∞ the recession function of φ.

Since C(B1n (0) × V) ⊂ C, e the elementary Young measures still act on C(B n (0) × V). The added
                                                                             1
benefit is that C(B1n (0) × V) is a separable normed vector space, and so we can apply separable
Banach–Alaoglu to pass to a weak limit for a bounded sequence of elementary Young measures. We
will prove this compactness property directly, however one could also see it by applying a suitable
“spherical compactification map”, which is the (linear, isometric) map T : Ce → C 0 (B1n (0) × B1V (0))
                BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                            101

given by:                                                                      
                                                                y
                                                                p     M
                             T (φ)(x, y, p, M ) := Rφ x, 1/2∗ , 1/2 ,
                                                        R      R      R
                      ∗                                                     ∗
where R := 1 − |y|2 − |p|2 − |M | and B1V (0) := {(y, p, M ) ∈ V : |y|2 + |p|2 + |M | < 1}. The maps
φ ∈ C(B1n (0) × V) are those ones such that T (φ) has spt(T (φ)) ⊂ K × B1V (0) for some compact
K ⊂ B1n (0), and have a continuous extension to B1n (0) × B1V (0) such that on B1n (0) × ∂B1V (0) the
extension is a function of only x and M ; the pull-back under T of the function on the “boundary”
B1n (0) × ∂B1V (0) is then the recession function. In the language of spherical compactification,
the Young measure is then a measure on B1n (0) × B1V3 (0): the part of the measure restricted to
B1n (0) × ∂B1V3 (0) is then the part of the measure which measures the energy loss.
                                    0 (V) for the set of functions φ ∈ C 0 (V) for which there is a
To make this precise, let us write Crec
continuous 1-homogeneous function φ∞ = φ∞ (M ) : V3 → R such that

                                            |φ(y, p, M ) − φ∞ (M )|
                                     lim             ∗              = 0.
                                 (y,p,M )→∞ 1 + |y|2 + |p|2 + |M |

For such a function we slightly abuse notation and write

                                                      |φ(y, p, M )|
                                  ∥φ∥∗ := sup           2∗      2
                                                                      .
                                           y,p,M 1 + |y| + |p| + |M |

                  0 (V) → R then has its mass defined through its operator norm, i.e.
A linear map F : Crec
                                                      0
                     M∗ (F) ≡ ∥F∥∗ := sup{F(φ) : φ ∈ Crec (V) obeys ∥φ∥∗ ≤ 1}.

We stress this is different to the ‘usual’ mass, which would be defined by

                          M(F) := sup{F(φ) : φ ∈ C 0 (V) obeys sup |φ| ≤ 1}.
                                                           0 (V) with φ∞ ≡ 0.
Notice also that if φ ∈ C 0 (V) has sup |φ| < ∞, then φ ∈ Crec

Definition B.2. We call a linear map F : C(B1n (0) × V) → R a Q-Young measure if there is a
                                   0 (V)∗ and F ∞ ∈ C 0 (B n (0) × ∂B V3 (0))∗ such that:
measurable function F : B1n (0) → Crec               c    1          1

   (a) for φ ∈ C(B1n (0) × V) we have
                                           Z
                                 F(φ) :=             Fx (φx ) dx + F ∞ (φ∞ ),
                                           B1n (0)

       where Fx ≡ F (x) and φx ≡ φ(x, ·);
   (b) Fx (idV ) = M(Fx ) = Q for a.e. x ∈ B1n (0), where idV ≡ 1 on V;
   (c) B n (0) M∗ (Fx ) dx + M(F ∞ ) < ∞, where
       R
            1


                M(F ∞ ) := sup{F ∞ (φ) : φ ∈ Cc0 (B1n (0) × ∂B1V3 (0)) obeys sup |φ| ≤ 1}.


In this case we write F := (F ⊗ dx, F ∞ ). We write Y Q for the set of all Q-Young measures.

Here, for a vector space W we have written W ∗ for its dual space.
102                BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

Note:
      (1) In [HS24], Q-Young measures are referred to as AQ -generalised Young measures.

      (2) Technically in the above definition φ∞ ∈ C 0 (B1n (0) × V3 ) whilst F ∞ acts on functions in
          Cc0 (B1n (0) × ∂B1V3 (0)). As recession functions are always 1-homogeneous in M , this requires
          identifying the set of such functions with Cc0 (B1n (0) × ∂B1V3 (0)) via restriction.
                                                       R
      (3) One can readily check that the integral B n (0) Fx (φx ) dx in Definition B.2 is well-defined.
                                                          1
          Indeed, since |Fx (φx )| ≤ M∗ (Fx )∥φx ∥∗ , by condition (c) in Definition B.2 it suffices to show
          that ∥φx ∥∗ is uniformly bounded in x for φ ∈ C(B1n (0) × V), which follows as φ ∈ C.     e

      (4) The condition in Definition B.2(b) in particular implies that Fx must be a positive Radon
          measure for a.e. x ∈ B1n (0), i.e. if φ ≥ 0, then Fx (φ) ≥ 0.

For F ∈ Y Q we then define
                                              Z
                                  ∥F∥Y Q :=              M∗ (Fx ) dx + M(F ∞ ).
                                               B1n (0)



Definition B.3. We say that (Fj )j ⊂ Y Q converges to F ∈ Y Q , and write Fj ⇀ F, if

                            lim Fj (φ) = F (φ)           for every φ ∈ C(B1n (0) × V).
                           j→∞



We start by proving the weak compactness of Y Q .

Proposition B.4 ([HS24, Proposition 2.2]). Suppose (Fj )j ⊂ Y Q is a sequence with supj ∥Fj ∥Y Q <
∞. Then, there exists F ∈ Y Q and a subsequence (j ′ ) such that:
      (i) ∥F∥Y Q ≤ lim inf j ∥Fj ∥Y Q ;
      (ii) Fj ′ ⇀ F.


Proof. Write Fj = (Fj ⊗ dx, Fj∞ ) for each j. Separable Banach–Alaoglu provides the existence of
some weak limit F satisfying the conclusions of the proposition, but we need to verify that F ∈ Y Q ,
i.e. that F = (F ⊗ dx, F ∞ ) for appropriate F and F ∞ .
Note first that Fj ⊗ dx defines a linear map C(B1n (0) × V) → R by
                                                 Z
                                 (Fj ⊗ dx)(φ) :=        Fx (φx ) dx.
                                                            B1n (0)

Clearly M∗ (Fj ⊗ dx) ≤ ∥Fj ∥Y Q for each j (here M∗ is defined analogously for linear functionals
C(B1n (0) × V) → R) and thus (Fj ⊗ dx)j is bounded, Similarly, Fj∞ gives a bounded sequence of
linear maps Cc0 (B1n (0) × ∂B1V3 (0)) → R. We may therefore apply separable Banach–Alaoglu to
both giving, up to passing to a subsequence,

                               Fj ⊗ dx ⇀ F̂         in C(B1n (0) × V)∗ ,
                                  Fj∞ ⇀ F̂ ∞        in Cc0 (B1n (0) × ∂B1V3 (0))∗ .
                BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                    103

Clearly we have F(φ) = F̂ (φ) + F̂ ∞ (φ∞ ) for φ ∈ C(B1n (0) × V). We now claim that in fact we have
                         Z
                F̂ (φ) =       (Fx )(φx ) dx + Fe∞ (φ∞ )      for φ ∈ C(B1n (0) × V),
                             B1n (0)


for some measurable F : B1n (0) → Crec     0 (V)∗ with M(F ) = Q for a.e. x ∈ B n (0) and F  e∞ ∈
                                                            x                       1
Cc0 (B1n (0) × ∂B1V3 (0))∗ ; once we have shown this the proof is complete, since F = (F ⊗ dx, F ∞ )
with F ∞ := F̂ ∞ + Fe∞ .

To show this, we wish to understand more the action Fj ⊗ dx. For this, we build up its limiting
behaviour on progressively more general functions in C(B1n (0) × V). To begin with, applying
sequential Banach–Alaoglu on Cc0 (B1n (0) × V) ⊂ C(B1n (0) × V), followed by the Riesz representation
theorem and the standard disintegration theorem [AFP00, Theorem 2.28], we see that there is a
measurable function F : B1n (0) → Cc0 (V)∗ such that for any φ ∈ Cc0 (B1n (0) × V),

(B.1)                                     (Fj ⊗ dx)(φ) → (F ⊗ dx)(φ)

i.e. for φ ∈ Cc0 (B1n (0) × V) we have F̂ (φ) = (F ⊗ dx)(φ) (note that for such φ the corresponding
recession function vanishes).

Next, let us consider a general φ ∈ C(B1n (0) × V) with φ∞ ≡ 0. This means that

                                                      |φ(x, y, p, M )|
                                  lim          sup         ∗              = 0,
                              (y,p,M )→∞ x∈B n (0) 1 + |y|2 + |p|2 + |M |
                                            1


which implies that for every δ > 0 there exists Rδ > 0 such that
                                               ∗                                   ∗
          sup |φ(x, y, p, M )| ≤ δ(1 + |y|2 + |p|2 + |M |)          whenever |y|2 + |p|2 + |M | > Rδ .
        x∈B1n (0)

Now, fix δ > 0 and let χδ : V → R be a smooth, decreasing, radial function which is identically 1
    V (0) and vanishes outside B V (0). Then χ φ ∈ C 0 (B n (0) × V), and so we know from (B.1),
on BR δ                         2Rδ           δ      c   1


                             (Fj ⊗ dx)(χδ φ) → (F ⊗ dx)(χδ φ) = F̂ (χδ φ).

On the other hand, ∥(1 − χδ )φ∥∗ ≤ δ, and so

                                       |(Fj ⊗ dx)((1 − χδ )φ)| ≤ ∥Fj ∥Y Q · δ

and similarly
                             |F̂ ((1 − χδ )φ)| ≤ M∗ (F̂ ) · δ ≤ sup ∥Fi ∥Y Q · δ
                                                                    i
(using the lower semi-continuity of ∥ · ∥Y Q along the convergent subsequence). Hence, for any fixed
δ > 0, for all sufficiently large j we have

                          |(Fj ⊗ dx)(φ) − (F ⊗ dx)(χδ φ)| ≤ δ + δ sup ∥Fi ∥Y Q .
                                                                          i

Taking j → ∞ and then δ ↓ 0 (using dominated convergence) we therefore see that

(B.2)                                    lim (Fj ⊗ dx)(φ) = (F ⊗ dx)(φ)
                                        j→∞
104               BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

for any φ ∈ C(B1n (0) × V) whose recession function vanishes; in particular, the action of F ⊗ dx
on such functions is well-defined (and agrees with F̂ ). This in particular implies that M(Fx ) =
Q for a.e. x ∈ B1n (0) (the upper bound of Q comes form mass lower semi-continuity along the
weakly convergent subsequence, and the lower bound comes from taking φ = ψ(x)1V in the above
convergence for any ψ ∈ Cc∞ (B1n (0))).

Finally, we are left with a general φ ∈ C(B1n (0) × V). First notice that φ − φ∞ ∈ C(B1n (0) × V) has
vanishing recession function, and so by (B.2)

                                 (Fj ⊗ dx)(φ − φ∞ ) → (F ⊗ dx)(φ − φ∞ ).

We are therefore left with evaluating limj→∞ (Fj ⊗ dx)(φ∞ ): if we can show that this is equal to
(F ⊗ dx)(φ∞ ) + Fe∞ (φ∞ ) for a suitable linear map Fe∞ : Cc0 (B1n (0) × ∂B1V3 (0)) → R, we will be
done.

                                                                                     V
For this, for each j define a linear map Fej which sends ψ ∈ Cc0 (B1n (0) × B 1 3 (0)) to
                                               Z
                                     Fj (ψ) :=
                                     e              (Fj )x (ψex ) dx
                                                     B1n (0)

       e M ) := ψ(x, M )(1 + |M |); this is well-defined because ψe ∈ C(B n (0) × V). Notice that
where ψ(x,              1+|M |                                                 1
the recession function of ψe is ψe∞ (x, M ) := |M |ψ(x, M/|M |). Note that for such ψ,

                                          Fej (ψ) ≤ ∥Fj ∥Y Q · sup |ψ|
                                                         V
and thus (Fej )j is a bounded sequence in Cc0 (B1n (0)×B 1 3 (0))∗ . Applying sequential Banach–Alaoglu,
                                                                           V
we can therefore pass to a subsequence and find Fe ∈ Cc0 (B1n (0) × B 1 3 (0))∗ such that
                                                                              V
                             Fej (ψ) → Fe(ψ)    for all ψ ∈ Cc0 (B1n (0) × B 1 3 (0)).

Thus, if φ = φ(x, M ) ∈ C(B1n (0) × V) is homogeneous degree one in the M -variable, then
                Z                                Z                                      
                                                                         M
(Fj ⊗ dx)(φ) =            (Fj )x (φ(x, M )) dx =          (Fj )x φ x,            (1 + |M |) dx ≡ Fej (φ∗ )
                  B1n (0)                         B1n (0)             1 + |M |

where φ∗ := φ|B n (0)×B V3 (0) . So,
                  1      1


                                          lim (Fj ⊗ dx)(φ) = Fe(φ∗ ).
                                         j→∞

Now fix ε > 0 and let ηε : [0, 1] → [0, 1] be a smooth, decreasing function, obeying ηε |[0,1−ε] ≡ 1
and ηε ≡ 0 on a neighbourhood of 1. Write

                        φ∗ (x, M ) = ηε (|M |)φ∗ (x, M ) + (1 − ηε (|M |))φ∗ (x, M ).
                                           V
Notice that ηε (|M |)φ∗ ∈ Cc0 (B1n (0)×B 1 3 (0)) vanishes on a neighbourhood of ∂B1V3 (0). We therefore
have:

         Fe(ηε (|M |)φ∗ ) = lim Fej (ηε (|M |)φ∗ )
                              j→∞
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                  105
                                                                                      
                                                      |M |
                                 Z
                                                                          M
                         = lim         (Fj )x ηε              φ∗ x,              (1 + |M |) dx
                           j→∞ B n (0)             1 + |M |           1 + |M |
                                Z 1                                 
                                                      |M |
                        = lim          (Fj )x ηε              φ(x, M ) dx
                           j→∞ B n (0)
                                  1
                                                   1 + |M |
                                                                 
                                                   |M |
                        = lim (Fj ⊗ dx) ηε                  φ(x, M )
                           j→∞                   1 + |M |
                                                            
                                              |M |
                        = (F ⊗ dx) ηε                  φ(x, M ) ,
                                            1 + |M |
                                                                          
                                                                     |M |                  n
where in the last line we have used the previous case, since ηε 1+|M      | φ(x, M ) ∈ C(B1 (0) × V) has
vanishing
         recession function. In particular, taking ε → 0 and using the form of F ⊗ dx (noting that
     |M |
ηε 1+|M | φ(x, M ) converges pointwise to φ(x, M ) as ε → 0 and so we may apply the dominated
convergence theorem), we get

                                 lim Fe(ηε (|M |)φ∗ ) = (F ⊗ dx)(φ(x, M )).
                                ε→0

In particular, this tells us that F ⊗ dx is now well-defined acting on C(B1n (0) × V). The remaining
part left to analyse is Fe((1 − ηε (|M |))φ∗ (x, M )). Note that pointwise, as ε → 0,

                       (1 − ηε (|M |))φ∗ (x, M ) → φ∗ (x, M )1B n (0)×∂B V3 (0) (x, M ).
                                                                  1       1

                                                                      V
Recall that as Fe is an element of the dual space of Cc0 (B1n (0) × B 1 3 (0)), the Riesz representation
                                                              V
theorem identifies it with a Borel measure on B1n (0) × B 1 3 (0). We may therefore consider the
measure-restriction Fe∞ := Fe (B1n (0) × ∂B1V3 (0)). The dominated convergence theorem combined
with the above pointwise convergence therefore gives

                     lim Fe((1 − ηε (|M |))φ∗ ) = Fe∞ (φ∗ |B n (0)×∂B V3 (0) ) ≡ Fe∞ (φ).
                     ε→0                                      1       1


Thus, combining everything we have shown, we have for any φ ∈ C(B1n (0)×V) which is homogeneous
degree one in the M -variables, for any ε > 0,

                  lim (Fj ⊗ dx)(φ) = Fe(φ∗ ) = Fe (ηε (|M |)φ∗ ) + Fe((1 − ηε (|M |))φ∗ )
                 j→∞

and then taking ε → 0 we get

                               lim (Fj ⊗ dx)(φ) = (F ⊗ dx)(φ) + Fe∞ (φ)
                               j→∞

which is exactly what we had left to show. This therefore completes the proof.                        □




We are most interested in the limits of elementary Young measures. In terms of the language of
Y Q , these are:
106                BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

Definition B.5. The elementary Young measure Ef associated to f ∈ W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk )) is the
Q-Young measure Ef = (Ef ⊗ dx, 0), where

                                Q
                                X
               (Ef )x (φ) =          φ(f α (x), Df α (x), Df α (x) ⊗ Df α (x))                       0
                                                                                            for φ ∈ Crec (V).
                              α=1


Note: If f ∈ W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk )), its elementary Young measure evidently satisfies M((Ef )x ) =
Q and
           Q                                                  Q
                                                                           ∗
          X                                                  X
              |f α (x)|2 + |Df α (x)|2 ≤ M∗ ((Ef )x ) ≤ Q +     (|f α (x)|2 + 2|Df α (x)|2 )
                                        
             α=1                                                               α=1

for a.e. x ∈ B1n (0). Thus, Ef ∈ Y Q and, as noted before,
                                                                           ∗
(B.3)              ∥f ∥2W 1,2 (B n (0)) ≤ ∥Ef ∥Y Q ≤ Qωn + ∥f ∥2W 1,2 (B n (0)) + 2∥f ∥2W 1,2 (B n (0)) .
                                1                                              1                       1



Definition B.6. We say F ∈ Y Q is a gradient Q-Young measure, and write F ∈ grad Y Q , if there
exists a sequence of elementary Young measures Efj associated to fj ∈ W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk )) such
that Efj ⇀ F.

Note: In [HS24] gradient Q-Young measures are called AQ -generalised gradient Young measures.
The following proposition provides a characterisation of gradient Q-Young measures.

Proposition B.7 ([HS24, Proposition 2.5]). Let F = (F ⊗ dx, F ∞ ) ∈ grad Y Q . Then, there exists
f ∈ W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk )) and a family of probability measures (νx,y )(x,y)∈B1n (0)×V1 on V2 × V3 such
that:
      (a) For a.e. x ∈ B1n (0) we have, for φ ∈ Crec
                                                 0 (V),


                                               Z        Q
                                                        X
(B.4)                               Fx (φ) =                 φ(f α (x), p, M ) dνx,f α (x) ;
                                                V2 ×V3 α=1


   (b) For a.e. x ∈ B1n (0) we have, for any i, j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, κ, κ′ ∈ {1, . . . , k}, and α ∈ {1, . . . , Q},
                                    Z
(B.5)                                       pκi dνx,f α (x) = ∂i f κ,α ;
                                               V2 ×V3


                      Z                                 Z
                                     ′                                 ′                              ′
(B.6)                           Mijκκ dνx,f α (x) =              pκi pκj dνx,f α (x) ≥ ∂i f κ,α ∂j f κ ,α ;
                       V2 ×V3                           V2 ×V3


      (c) spt(F ∞ ) ⊂ B1n (0) × {M ∈ ∂B1V3 (0) : M ≥ 0}, and furthermore F ∞ is positive, i.e. if φ ≥ 0,
          then F ∞ (φ) ≥ 0.
Here, f κ,α ≡ eκ · f α , where e1 , . . . , ek is the standard basis for Rk .

Note: In Proposition B.7, the inequalities in (B.6) and (c) are understood in the sense of matrices,
i.e. for real m × m matrices A, B, we write A ≥ B if and only if xT Ax ≥ xT Bx for all x ∈ Rm . In
particular, A ≥ B if and only if A − B is non-negative definite.
              BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                          107

Proof. We first prove (a). Fix a generating sequence fj ∈ W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk )) with Efj ⇀ F.
First note that, by setting φ(x, y, p, M ) := |y|2 + Miiκκ ∈ C(B1n (0) × V), we have

                             lim ∥fj ∥W 1,2 (B1n (0);AQ (Rk )) ≡ lim Efj (φ) = F (φ)
                            j→∞                                       j→∞


and thus the sequence ∥fj ∥W 1,2 (B1n (0);AQ (Rk )) is bounded24. We may therefore apply the Sobolev
embedding theorem (for multi-valued functions, see e.g. [DLS11, Proposition 2.11]) to find f ∈
W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk )) such that, up to passing to a subsequence, fj → f strongly in Lp for all
p < 2∗ and ∥Df ∥L2 ≤ lim inf j ∥Dfj ∥L2 .
Now let φ = φ(x, y) ∈ Cc1 (B1n (0) × V1 ). We have

                                          Z         Q
                                                    X                         Q
                                                                              X
                  |Efj (φ) − Ef (φ)| =                      φ(x, fjα (x)) −          φ(x, f β (x)) dx
                                              B1n (0) α=1                     β=1
                                          Z               Q
                                                          X
                                      ≤             inf         φ(x, fjα (x)) − φ(x, f π(α) (x)) dx
                                          B1n (0)   π
                                                          α=1
                                          Z
                                      ≤             ∥Dy φ∥∞ · G(fj (x), f (x)) dx
                                          B1n (0)
                                      = ∥Dy φ∥∞ ∥G(fj , f )∥L1
                                      →0      as j → ∞

where in the second line the infimum is over all permutations π : {1, . . . , Q} → {1, . . . , Q}. Since we
also know Efj (φ) → F(φ), we see that we must have F(φ) = Ef (φ) for such φ ∈ Cc1 (B1n (0)×V1 ); by
an approximation argument we then have F(φ) = Ef (φ) for any φ ∈ Cc0 (B1n (0) × V1 ). Furthermore,
since φ only depends on x, y here we have F (φ) = (F ⊗ dx)(φ), where F is as in Definition B.2 for
F. In particular, this is saying that
                                                                Q
                                                                X
                                       (π0 ⊗ π1 )# F =                Jf α K ⊗ dx.
                                                                α=1

In particular, the classical disintegration theorem [AFP00, Theorem 2.28] implies (a).
Next we prove (B.5). We will divide this into three claims.
Claim 1: Suppose there is a sequence of measurable sets Ej ⊂ E, where E ⊂ B1n (0) is measurable,
with Hn (E \ Ej ) → 0, as well as two uniformly bounded sequences fj , gj ∈ W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk ))
with Efj ⇀ F and Egj ⇀ Fe such that fj = gj on Ej . Then, if F = (F ⊗ dx, F ∞ ) and Fe =
(Fe ⊗ dx, Fe∞ ), we have Fx = Fex for a.e. x ∈ E.

Proof of Claim 1. This is a simple check. Indeed, approximate differentiability of Q-valued func-
tions [DLS11, Corollary 2.7] gives that

                                                    Tx0 fj = Tx0 gj

for a.e. x ∈ Ej , where Tx0 fj and Tx0 gj denote the first order approximations of fj and gj (re-
spectively) at x0 . In particular, for a.e. x ∈ Ej we have (Efj )x = (Egj )x . Now, suppose that
24This can also be seen by combining (B.3) and the uniform boundedness principle, which gives lim sup ∥E ∥ Q < ∞.
                                                                                                     j  fj Y
108               BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

φ ∈ Cc0 (B1n (0) × V); then

                                                       |φ(x, y, p, M )|
                                  A := sup               2∗      2      1/2
                                                                            < ∞.
                                         x,y,p,M (1 + |y| + |p| + |M |)

Thus, we have
   Z
         |(Efj )x (φx ) + |(Egj )x (φx )| dx
      E\Ej
                                      Q Z
                                                                    ∗                                ∗
                                      X
                            ≤A                    (1 + |fjα (x)|2 + 2|Dfjα (x)|2 + |gjα (x)|2 + 2|Dgjα (x)|2 )1/2
                                      α=1 E\Ej

                            = C(n)A (∥fj ∥W 1,2 + ∥gj ∥W 1,2 )1/2 Hn (E \ Ej )1/2


which therefore → 0 as j → ∞. As (Efj )x = (Egj )x on Ej , we therefore see that
                                            Z                      Z
                                                 Fx (φx ) dx =           Fex (φx ) dx.
                                            E                        E

As φ ∈ Cc0 (B1n (0) × V) was arbitrary, we then conclude that Fx = Fex for a.e. x ∈ E.                                           □

Claim 2: (B.5) holds a.e. on E0 := {f = QJfa K}.25

Proof of Claim 2. Note first that (fj )a ⇀ fa in W 1,2 (B1n (0); Rk ). Therefore, for any φ ∈ Cc0 (B1n (0)),
if we set ψ(x, p) := φ(x)pκi for some i ∈ {1, . . . , n} and κ ∈ {1, . . . , k}, we have
                                  Z                Q
                                                   X                           Z                              Z
F(ψ) = lim Efj (ψ) = lim                  φ(x)           ∂i f κ,α = Q lim                φ(x)∂i (fjκ )a = Q             φ(x)∂i faκ .
         j→∞             j→∞ B n (0)                                     j→∞ B n (0)                          B1n (0)
                              1                    α=1                        1


But since such ψ have vanishing recession function, we have F(ψ) = (F ⊗ dx)(ψ), and thus using
(B.4) we have
                   Z          Z       XQ                         Z
                         φ(x)             pκi dνx,f α (x) dx = Q   φ(x)∂i faκ .
                        B1n (0)          V2 ×V3 α=1                                  B1n (0)

Since φ ∈ Cc0 (B1n (0)) was arbitrary, this therefore implies for a.e. x ∈ B1n (0),
                                         Q Z
                                         X
(B.7)                                                       pκi dνx,f α (x) = Q∂i faκ .
                                         α=1 V2 ×V3

Hence since on {f = QJfa K} we have f α (x) = fa for α = 1, 2, . . . , Q, we see that for a.e. x ∈ E0
the above gives                 Z
                                                         pκi dνx,fa (x) = ∂i faκ (x).
                                                V2 ×V3

This proves (B.5) for a.e. x ∈ E0 , proving Claim 2.                                                                             □

25Recall that f ≡ 1 PQ f denotes the average of f , and so a is not a varying index.
               a  Q  α=1
              BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                                                 109

Claim 3: (B.5) holds.

Proof. We work by induction on Q. The case Q = 1 is just a statement about weak convergence
of W 1,2 functions, and so is true. We may therefore assume that (B.5) holds for all Q′ < Q. By
Claim 2, we know that (B.5) holds for a.e. x ∈ E0 := {f = QJfa K}.
Now fix any S ∈ AQ (Rk ) with S ̸= QJsK for any s ∈ Rk . We may therefore find εS > 0 and (globally
defined) Lipschitz retractions χi : AQ (Rk ) → AQi (Rk ), i = 1, 2, such that whenever G(T, S) < 2εS
we may write
                                        T = χ1 (T ) + χ2 (T ).
Now consider E := {x : G(f (x), S) < εS }, and define the sequences
                              (i)
                          fj := χi ◦ fj ∈ W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQi (Rk ))                     for i = 1, 2.

Also write Ej := {x ∈ E : G(fj (x), S) < εS } for each j. Clearly we have Hn (E \ Ej ) → 0 since
fj → f a.e. x ∈ B1n (0). Furthermore, for a.e. x ∈ Ej ,

                                                  (Ef (1) )x + (Ef (2) )x = (Efj )x
                                                      j             j


by the almost everywhere differentiability of multi-valued W 1,2 functions. We may also assume,
passing to a subsequence if necessary, that for i = 1, 2 we have Ef (i) ⇀ F (i) ≡ (F (i) ⊗ dx, (F (i) )∞ )
                                                                                         j
as j → ∞. By Claim 1, we see that for a.e. x ∈ E,

                                             F ⊗ dx = F (1) ⊗ dx + F (2) ⊗ dx.
                                                                        (1)        (2)
Hence, by applying our inductive hypothesis to fj and fj , we deduce that (B.5) holds for
a.e. x ∈ E. Since S ∈ AQ (Rk ) \ {QJsK : s ∈ Rk } was arbitrary, by covering B1n (0) \ E0 by sets of
the above type, and combining with Claim 2, we conclude the proof of (B.5).                       □

Next we prove (B.6). Fix χ ∈ Cc∞ (V3 ) with χ ≡ 1 on B1V3 (0) and let ψ ∈ Cc∞ (B1n (0) × V1 ) be
arbitrary. Now consider, for R > 0,
                                                                               
                                    κκ′                                     p⊗p          ′
       φ(x, y, M ) := ψ(x, y)χ(M/R)Mij      and    φ(x, y, p) := ψ(x, y)χ
                                                   e                              pκi pκj .
                                                                             R

                  e have vanishing recession functions, and since Efj (φ) = Efj ( e
Then, since φ and φ                                                              φ), we have

  Q
Z X                   Z              
             α                    M           ′
        ψ(x, f (x))       χ               Mijκκ dνx,f α (x) dx = (F ⊗ dx)(φ)
                                  R
  α=1
                                                                = lim Efj (φ)
                                                                    j→∞
                                                                = lim Efj ( e
                                                                           φ)
                                                                    j→∞
                                                                      Q                                       
                                                                                                         p⊗p
                                                                    Z X                      Z
                                                                                   α                                    ′
                                                                =             ψ(x, f (x))        χ                 pκi pκj dνx,f α (x) dx.
                                                                                                          R
                                                                        α=1

Taking R → ∞ in this equality and using the dominated convergence theorem, followed by the
arbitrariness of ψ ∈ Cc∞ (B1n (0) × V1 ), we see that for a.e. x ∈ B1n (0) the first equality in (B.6)
110               BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

holds. The inequality part of (B.6) then follows from Jensen’s inequality applied to the convex
                        ′
function G(p) := pκi pκj ξ i ξ j ηκ ηκ′ , for fixed ξ ∈ Rn and η ∈ Rk (here we are using summation
convention). Indeed, Jensen’s inequality gives
            Z                        Z                     Z                 
   i j         κ κ′
  ξ ξ ηk ηκ′ pi pj dνx,f α (x) = G(p) dνx,f α (x) ≥ G           p dνx,f α (x)
                                                                    Z                   Z                
                                                          i j              κ                  κ′
                                                       = ξ ξ ηκ ηκ′      pi dνx,f α (x)      pj dνx,f α (x)
                                                                                     ′
                                                      = ξ i ξ j ηκ ηκ′ ∂i f κ,α ∂j f κ ,α
                                                      ≡ (η · ∂ξ f α (x))2

which is the claimed inequality; here, we have used (B.5) in the second-to-last equality.

Finally we prove (c). Let M0 ∈ ∂B1V3 (0) be such that dist(M0 , {M ≥ 0}) = 2δ > 0. Suppose φ ∈
Cc0 (B1n (0) × ∂B1V3 (0)) has spt(φ) ⊂ B1n (0) × (Bδ (M0 ) ∩ ∂B1V3 (0)). Let φ∞ (M ) := |M |φ(x, M/|M |)
be its 1-homogeneous extension in the M -variable. Then consider:

                                   φR (x, M ) := ρ(|M |/R)φ∞ (x, M ),

where ρ : [0, ∞) → R is a non-decreasing function with ρ(t) ≡ 0 for t < 1/2 and ρ(t) ≡ 1 for t ≥ 1.
Note that φ∞       ∞ is the recession function of φ . Thus, by dominated convergence, we have
             R := φ                                R

                     F ∞ (φ) ≡ F ∞ (φ∞ ) = lim F(φR ) = lim lim Efj (φR ) = 0,
                                              R→∞                R→∞ j→∞

where the last equality follows because Efj (φR ) = 0 for any R > 0 and j ≥ 1, as Df (x) ⊗ Df (x) is
always a non-negative definite matrix. This therefore proves the first part of (c). The second part
of (c) follows immediately from the proof of Proposition B.4 and how the concentration part of the
Q-Young measure arises. This therefore completes the proof of Proposition B.7.                    □


B.1. Stationary Gradient Q-Young Measures. Throughout this section, we fix F = (F ⊗
dx, F ∞ ) ∈ grad Y Q . We consider the action of F on two specific types of functions in C(B1n (0) × V),
namely:

      • the outer variation

                        O(φ) := F (pκi y κ ∂i φ + Miiκκ φ)       for φ ∈ Cc∞ (B1n (0));


      • the inner variation

                    I(φ) := F ((2Mijκκ − δij Mℓℓ
                                              κκ
                                                 )∂i φj )        for φ ∈ Cc∞ (B1n (0); V1 ).


Here, our convention is that a repeated index is summed over.

We will assume throughout this section that:

      • F is stationary, meaning that O ≡ 0 and I ≡ 0;

      • f ̸≡ 0 on B1n (0), where f ∈ W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk )) is as in Proposition B.7.
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                 111

Fix φ the Lipschitz cut-off function from Section 3. For x0 ∈ B1n (0) and r ∈ (0, 1 − |x0 |), we define
                                                                       
                                             2−n        |x − x0 |      κκ
                              D(x0 , r) := r     F φ                Mii ,
                                                           r
                                                                             
                                                     |x − x0 |       1
                        H(x0 , r) := r1−n F −φ′                             |y|2 .
                                                         r        |x − x0 |
We stress that whilst −φ′ is not strictly a continuous function, one can still make sense of H(x0 , r)
by approximation, and indeed using Proposition B.7 we have
                                                            
                                                 ′ |x − x0 |
                                             Z
                                         1−n                      1
(B.8)                    H(x0 , r) = −r         φ                        |f |2 .
                                                       r       |x − x0 |

Then, provided H(x0 , r) > 0, we define the frequency function by

                                                         D(x0 , r)
                                          I(x0 , r) :=             .
                                                         H(x0 , r)

Remark B.8. At various points we will need to evaluate F on certain functions arising from φ′
which are not continuous, as well as differentiating D(r). All of this can be justified by Proposition
B.7, since we can regard Fx as corresponding to the probability measures νx,f α (x) and we can
regard F ∞ as a positive Radon measure (and so ∥F ∞ ∥({|x| = r}) = 0 for a.e. r ∈ (0, 1)). Thus, by
standard approximation arguments and the Dominated Convergence Theorem, D(r) is absolutely
continuous on (0, 1), and furthermore equations such as (B.9) and the formula for D′ (r) below both
hold true for a.e. r ∈ (0, 1).

Proposition B.9 ([HS24, Proposition 3.7(4)]). Let F ∈ grad Y Q be as above, and suppose x0 ∈
B1n (0) is such that f ̸≡ 0 on Br (x0 ) for all r ∈ (0, 1 − |x0 |). Then, r 7→ I(x0 , r) is monotone
non-decreasing on (0, 1 − |x0 |).

Remark: In Remark B.11, we will see that one can remove the assumption that f ̸≡ 0 on Br (x0 )
for all r ∈ (0, 1 − |x0 |), as this will be implied by the assumption that f ̸≡ 0 on B1 (0).

Proof. We can without loss of generality assume that x0 = 0, else consider (η̃x0 ,1−|x0 | )# F, where
η̃x0 ,r (x, y, p, M ) := ( x−x           2
                             r , y, rp, r M ). We will write D(r) ≡ D(0, r) and so forth.
                              0


For φ the cut-off function as in Section 3, we know by assumption that I(φ(|x|/r)x) = 0 and
O(φ(|x|/r)) = 0 (cf. Remark B.8). These give the identities:

                                                            |x| xT κκ x
                                                                    
                             κκ    ′       |x| κκ     ′ |x|
(B.9)      F (2 − n)φ(|x|/r)Mii − φ (|x|/r) Mii + 2F φ             M       = 0;
                                            r            r   r |x|   |x|


                                                          Q
                                              φ′ (|x|/r) X α
                                          Z
(B.10)              F(φ(|x|/r)Miiκκ ) +                   f (x) · Df α (x)x dx = 0;
                                                 |x|r
                                                         α=1

where we have used (B.5) in the outer variation computation. We may then compute:
                                                                       
                    ′        1−n                     κκ    ′     |x| κκ
                   D (r) = r     F (2 − n)φ(|x|/r)Mii − φ (|x|/r) Mii
                                                                  r
112              BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

                                                     |x| xT κκ x
                                                                 
                                   1−n      ′
                           = −2r         F φ (|x|/r)        M       ,
                                                      r |x|   |x|

where the second equality comes from (B.9). To compute the derivative of H(r), note that by (B.8)
and a change of variables w = x/r we have
                                         Z
                                                  1
                               H(r) = − φ′ (w)       |f (rw)|2 dw
                                                 |w|

and so, differentiating under the integral sign and changing variables back to x, we get
                                                           Q
                                               φ′ (|x|/r) X α
                                           Z
                        H′ (r) = −2r1−n                    f (x) · Df α (x)x dx.
                                                  r|x|
                                                           α=1

Thus, (B.10) gives

                                                       2
(B.11)                                         H′ (r) = D(r).
                                                       r
In particular, Proposition B.7(c) gives that both D′ (r) ≥ 0 and H′ (r) ≥ 0 (recall that −φ′ ≥ 0),
and thus both H(r) and D(r) are non-decreasing.
Let us note that the given condition gives that H(r) > 0 for all r ∈ (0, 1). Indeed, if H(r) = 0 for
some r, then f ≡ 0 on Br (0) \ B r/2 (0). But then from (B.10) (combined with (B.6)), we would
need |Df | ≡ 0 on Br (0), and thus that f is constant on Br (0). As it is zero on Br (0) \ B r/2 (0), it
would therefore need f ≡ 0 on Br (0), contradicting our assumption.
Thus, H(r) > 0 for all r ∈ (0, 1), and so I(r) is well-defined for all r ∈ (0, 1). Using the above
expressions we can then compute:

           D′ (r)H(r) − D(r)H′ (r)
  I ′ (r) =
                    H(r)2
           2r1−2n                  |x| xT κκ x
                                               Z                      
                          ′                             ′          r    2
         =         F −φ (|x|/r)           M           −φ (|x|/r) |f |
           H(r)2                    r |x|   |x|                   |x|
                                                     Z              Q
                                                                                               !2 
                                                                   X                      x
                                                 −     φ′ (|x|/r)     f α (x) · Df α (x)     dx  .
                                                                                         |x|
                                                                     α=1


But now using Cauchy–Schwartz followed by (B.4), (B.6), and (c) of Proposition B.7 (as then the
function inside F in the above is non-negative due to the restriction on the support of F), we see
that I ′ (r) ≥ 0, completing the proof.                                                         □


In particular, Proposition B.9 tells us that about any point x0 ∈ B1n (0) for which f ̸≡ 0 about x0 ,
we have that the frequency of f at x0 , namely

                                           I(x0 ) := lim I(x0 , r)
                                                     r→0

is well-defined as a number in [0, ∞).
We get several immediate corollaries from Proposition B.9.
             BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                    113

Proposition B.10 ([HS24, Proposition 3.7(5)]). Let F be as above. Then for a given x0 ∈ B1n (0),
we either have that f ≡ 0 on B1−|x0 | (x0 ), or H(x0 , r) > 0 for all r ∈ (0, 1 − |x0 |).
In fact, for any 0 < r ≤ R < 1 − |x0 | we always have
                      2I(x0 ,r)                          2I(x0 ,R)
                      R                                    R
                                  H(x0 , r) ≤ H(x0 , R) ≤              H(x0 , r).
                      r                                    r

Remark B.11. An immediate consequence of Proposition B.10 is that either f ≡ 0, or I(x0 , r) is
well-defined for all x0 ∈ B1n (0) and r ∈ (0, 1 − |x0 |). Indeed, if H(x0 , r) = 0 for some x0 ∈ B1n (0)
and r ∈ (0, 1 − |x0 |), then Proposition B.10 gives that f ≡ 0 on B1−|x     n     (x0 ). But then for all
                                                                               0|
      n                                                                                    n
y ∈ B1−|x0 | (x0 ) and sufficiently small r we have H(y, r) = 0, and so again f ≡ 0 on B1−|y|  (y) for all
y ∈ B1−|x0 | (x0 ). Repeating this eventually we get that we can take y = 0, and so f ≡ 0 on B1n (0).
      n


In particular, since we assumed that f ̸≡ 0 on B1n (0), we see that H(x0 , r) > 0 for all x0 ∈ B1n (0)
and r ∈ (0, 1 − |x0 |), meaning that I(x0 , r) is well-defined always.

Proof. Again by translating and rescaling we can without loss of generality assume that x0 = 0.
If H(r0 ) > 0, then H(r) > 0 for all r ∈ (r0 − ε, r0 + ε) for some ε > 0; let us therefore suppose (a, b)
is the largest interval containing r0 on which H > 0 (we will show that in fact (a, b) = (0, 1)). We
can then compute for r ∈ (a, b):

                                      d             H′ (r)  2
                                         log H(r) =        = I(r)
                                      dr            H(r)    r

where we have used (B.11). Integrating we therefore get for r, R ∈ (a, b), r < R,

                                          H(R)   RR 2
                                                      I(ρ) dρ
                                               =e r ρ         .
                                          H(r)

Using the monotonicity of I from Proposition B.9 we therefore get
                              2I(r)                2I(R)
                              R                      R
                                      H(r) ≤ H(R) ≤          H(r).
                              r                      r

In particular, since H is increasing (from (B.11)), as H(r0 ) > 0 we know H > 0 on (a, 1), i.e. b = 1.
Thus, for r ∈ (a, 1) we have
                                          H(r) ≥ r2I(1) H(1).
This provides a constant lower bound on H(r), and thus we see that we must in fact have H(r) > 0
for all r ∈ (0, 1), i.e. a = 0. This completes the proof.                                     □

Proposition B.12. Let F be as above. Then, the function x 7→ I(x) is upper semi-continuous.

Proof. Suppose we have xi → x ∈ B1n (0) with I(xi ) defined for all i; in particular, I(x) must be
well-defined, else f ≡ 0 on a neighbourhood of x which implies that f ≡ 0 on a neighbourhood of
xi for all i sufficiently large, a contradiction. Now fix r > 0. We clearly have D(xi , r) → D(x, r)
and H(xi , r) → H(x, r), and so I(xi , r) → I(x, r). Hence from the monotonicity of I,

                               lim sup I(xi ) ≤ lim sup I(xi , r) = I(x, r).
                                i→∞              i→∞
114              BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

Taking r ↓ 0 then gives the result.                                                                 □

From the proof of Proposition B.9, we get a characterisation of constant frequency via homogeneity,
i.e.:

Definition B.13. For I ∈ [0, ∞), we say that F ∈ grad Y Q is I-homogeneous if:
                   
         ∂    f (x)
     • ∂|x|   |x|I
                      = 0 for a.e. x ∈ B1n (0);

     • xT M κκ x dνx,f α (x) = I 2 |f α (x)|2 for a.e. x ∈ B1n (0);
       R

      • F ∞ (xT M κκ x) = 0.
Here, f is as in Proposition B.7 for F.

Proposition B.14 ([HS24, Corollary 3.8]). Let F be as above. Then, I(0, r) ≡ I for r ∈ (0, 1) if
and only if F is I-homogeneous.

Proof. This follows immediately from the proof of Proposition B.9 via the equality case in the
Cauchy–Schwarz inequality as well as the inequalities used from Proposition B.7. To see the
homogeneity is determined by the (constant) frequency value, we note that the expression for I ′ (r)
can also be written as
                                                                    Q
                  " 
            2r1−n                |x| xT κκ x
                                                 Z
     ′                                                          1 X
   I (r) =         F −φ′ (|x|/r)        M        + φ′ (|x|/r)          |Df α (x)x|2 dx
            H(r)                  r |x|     |x|               |x|r
                                                                   α=1
                                                             Q
                                             Z                                               #
                                                         1   X
                                          − φ′ (|x|/r)          |Df α (x)x − I(r)f α (x)|2 dx .
                                                        |x|r
                                                                 α=1

                                                                                                    □

It is only at this point, in our final two propositions, that we deviate from [HS24]. Nonetheless, we
use arguments similar to those seen in [HS24, Proposition 3.7 & Lemma 3.11].
If F as above is I-homogeneous for some I > 0, we know that the associated function f ∈
W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk )) is I-homogeneous; in such a situation, we will abuse notation and also write
f ∈ W 1,2 (Rn ; AQ (Rk )) for its I-homogeneous extension to Rn . In particular, standard arguments
imply that its spine
                             Sf := {z ∈ Rn : f (x + z) = f (x) for a.e. x ∈ Rn }
is a subspace of Rn . In this situation, we claim:

Proposition B.15. Suppose F as above is I-homogeneous for some I > 0. Then:

                               Sf ∩ B1n (0) = {x ∈ B1n (0) : I(x) = I(0)}.

Furthermore, F is I-homogeneous centered at any x ∈ Sf ∩ B1n (0).

Proof. First notice that the inclusion Sf ∩ B1n (0) ⊂ {x ∈ B1n (0) : I(x) = I(0)} is clear. Indeed, if
z ∈ Sf , then
                                                       
                                              ′ |x − z|
                                          Z
                                                             1
                         H(z, r) = −r 1−n
                                            φ                     |f (x)|2 dx
                                                     r    |x − z|
                BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                         115
                                                           
                                                     |x| 1
                                                  Z
                                        = −r1−n         φ   |f (x + z)|2 dx
                                                      r |x|
                                                 Z  
                                                     |x| 1
                                        = −r 1−n
                                                   φ        |f (x)|2 dx
                                                      r |x|
                                        = H(0, r),

and so by Proposition B.10, gives for any 0 < r < R < 1 − |z|,
                    2I(z,R)            2I(z,R)
                    R                    R
       H(z, R) ≤              H(z, r) =            H(0, r)
                    r                    r
                                         2(I(z,R)−I(0,r))            2(I(z,R)−I(0,r))
                                         R                             R
                                      ≤                     H(0, R) =                     H(z, R)
                                         r                             r

i.e.                                           I(z,R)−I(0,r)
                                               R
                                                               ≥ 1,
                                               r
and hence I(0, r) ≤ I(z, R) for all 0 < r < R < 1 − |z|. Swapping the roles of 0 and z in the above
argument also gives I(z, r) ≤ I(0, R) for all 0 < r < R < 1 − |z|, and hence taking r ↓ 0 followed
by R ↓ 0 we see that we need I(0) = I(z). This proves the first inclusion.
Now we wish to show that if z ∈ B1n (0) has I(z) = I(0), then z ∈ Sf . For this, we will show that
I(z, r) is constant with r (where defined), giving that we can apply Proposition B.14 to give that
f is homogeneous of degree I ≡ I(0) based at z 26, from which a standard argument gives z ∈ Sf .
Indeed, if we know that, for any λ > 0, f (λx) = λI f (x) and f (z + λx) = λI f (z + x) for a.e. x ∈ Rn ,
then                                                     
                             I    x+z       I         x−z
                f (x + z) = 2 f         =2 f z+               = f (z + (x − z)) = f (x)
                                   2                    2
for a.e. x ∈ Rn , and thus z ∈ Sf . So, it suffices to show that I(z, r) is constant in r ∈ (0, 1 − |z|).
To see this, fix z ∈ Sf and r ∈ (0, 1−|z|). By the homogeneity of f based at 0 and (B.10) (or rather,
the analogous formula centered at an arbitrary point rather than 0) one can easily check that for
all t ∈ (0, 1) we have H(tz, tr) = t2I H(z, r) and D(tz, tr) = t2I D(z, r), and hence I(tz, tr) = I(z, r)
for any such z, r, t. But then by the monotonicity formula

                                       I(z, r) = lim I(tz, tr) ≤ lim I(tz, r).
                                                  t↓0            t→0

Now, for r > 0 we have D(tz, r) → D(0, r) and H(tz, r) → H(0, r), and so limt→0 I(tz, r) = I(0, r).
Therefore,
                               I(z, r) ≤ lim I(tz, r) = I(0, r) = I,
                                                  t→0
where the last equality is from the I-homogeneity. But then since I(z, r) is increasing and
limr→0 I(z, r) = I by assumption this means that I(z, r) is constant for r ∈ (0, 1 − |z|), which
is what we needed to prove in order to complete the proof.                                    □


Finally, we have:

26Notice that, as f is defined on Rn from a homogeneous extension on B n (0), it suffices to show this homogeneity
                                                                         1
within B1n (0) in order to get it on Rn .
116              BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

Proposition B.16. Suppose F as above is I-homogeneous for some I > 0 with f ̸≡ 0. Then
dim Sf ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}. Moreover, dim Sf = n − 1 only if I = 1.



Proof. Since Sf is a subspace of Rn we know that dim Sf ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n}. However, if dim Sf = n,
then f is constant almost everywhere, which being homogeneous of degree I > 0 would mean that
f ≡ 0, contradicting our assumption that f ̸≡ 0. Thus, dim Sf ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}.

Now suppose dim Sf = n − 1: we want to show that I = 1. Without loss of generality choose
coordinates of Rn so that Sf = {0} × Rn−1 , and thus f (x) ≡ f (x1 ). By Proposition B.15, we know
that I(z, r) ≡ I for all z ∈ Sf . As Sf is a subspace, this means that for any t ∈ R and i = 2, . . . , n,
if ei denotes the ith standard basis vector of Rn , then for any ψ ∈ Cc0 (B1n (0)):
                                                                    Z          Q
                                                                               X
                  F(ψ(x)(x − tei ) M  T       κκ
                                                    (x − tei )) =       ψ(x)         |Df (x)(x − tei )|2 .
                                                                               α=1

Indeed, this follows from (the proof of) Proposition B.9, as the derivative of r 7→ I(tei , r) is
zero (cf. Proposition B.14). Differentiating the above expression twice in t and using that f is
independent of xi then gives

(B.12)                                               F (ψ(x)Miiκκ ) = 0

for such i (we stress that here the index κ is being summed over but the index i is not). It follows
that

(B.13)                                               F (ψ(x)Mijκκ ) = 0

provided at least one of i, j is in {2, . . . , n}. Indeed, to see this, let (fp )p be the sequence in
W 1,2 (B1n (0); AQ (Rk )) obeying Efp → F. Then, for any such ψ, we have
                                      Z
               Efp (ψ(x)Mijκκ )   =                 ψ(x)∂i fpκ ∂j fpκ dx
                                          B1n (0)
                                      Z
                                  ≤             |ψ(x)|∥∂i fp ∥ · ∥∂j fp ∥ dx
                                      B1n (0)
                                          Z                             !1/2   Z                             !1/2
                                  ≤                  |ψ(x)|∥∂i fp ∥2                       |ψ(x)|∥∂j fp ∥2
                                           B1n (0)                               B1n (0)
                                   q                  q
                                  = Efp (|ψ(x)|Miiκκ ) Efp (|ψ(x)|Mjj
                                                                   κκ ).


Thus, taking p → ∞ we get
                                                      q               q
                          F(ψ(x)Mijκκ ) ≤              F(|ψ(x)|Miiκκ ) F(|ψ(x)|Mjj
                                                                                κκ ).


Hence, (B.13) follows from this and (B.12).

By (B.13), the inner variation formula for F reduces to
                                          κκ
                                      F(2M11 ∂1 φ1 − M11
                                                      κκ
                                                         div(φ)) = 0
               BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                              117

for all φ = (φ1 , . . . , φn ) ∈ Cc1 (B1n (0); Rn ). Replacing φ1 by −φ1 in the above we get
                                κκ
                             F(M11 div(φ)) = 0            for all φ ∈ Cc1 (B1n (0); Rn ).

Now define G : Cc0 (B1n (0)) → R to be the continuous linear functional defined by G (ψ) :=
F(ψ(x)M11  κκ ). By the Riesz representation theorem, we can regard G as a (signed) Radon measure.

By the above, we know that G (div(φ)) = 0 for all φ ∈ Cc1 (B1n (0); Rn ), i.e. the distributional de-
rivative of G is zero. By a standard argument (using mollification to approximate G by a smooth
function with zero derivative) it follows that G is a constant multiple of the Lebesgue measure,
i.e. there exists a constant m ≥ 0 such that
                                  Z
                         G (ψ) =        mψ(x) dx      for all ψ ∈ Cc0 (B1n (0)).
                                       B1n (0)

So by definition,
                                          Z
                               κκ
(B.14)                 F (ψ(x)M11 )=                  mψ(x) dx      for all ψ ∈ Cc0 (B1n (0)).
                                            B1n (0)


But (B.14) implies, by the definition of D(r), that D(r) = Dr2 for some D ≥ 0. Then recalling
(B.11), we know that H′ (r) = 2r D(r) = 2Dr and so since limr→0 H(r) = 0 (by Proposition B.10) we
therefore get that H(r) = Dr2 (in particular, D > 0 as H(r) > 0). But then H(r) = D(r) giving
that I(r) = 1 for all r > 0, meaning that I = limr→0 I(r) = 1, as claimed.                      □


                                                      References
[AFP00]    Luigi Ambrosio, Nicola Fusco, and Diego Pallara. Functions of bounded variation and free discontinuity
           problems. Oxford University Press, 2000.
[All72]    William K Allard. On the first variation of a varifold. Annals of mathematics, 95(3):417–491, 1972.
[Alm00]    Frederick J Almgren. Almgren’s big regularity paper: Q-valued functions minimizing Dirichlet’s integral
           and the regularity of area-minimizing rectifiable currents up to codimension 2, volume 1. World scientific,
           2000.
[Bel25]    Costante Bellettini. Extensions of schoen–simon–yau and schoen–simon theorems via iteration á la de
           giorgi. Inventiones Mathematicae, pages 1–34, 2025.
[BK17]     Spencer Becker-Kahn. Transverse singularities of minimal two-valued graphs in arbitrary codimension.
           Journal of Differential Geometry, 107(2):241–325, 2017.
[BKMW25] Spencer Becker-Kahn, Paul Minter, and Neshan Wickramasekera. On the nature of stationary integral
           varifolds near multiplicity 2 planes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.13148, 2025.
[BW18]     Costante Bellettini and Neshan Wickramasekera. Stable cmc integral varifolds of codimension 1: regu-
           larity and compactness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.00377, 2018.
[BW19]     Costante Bellettini and Neshan Wickramasekera. Stable prescribed-mean-curvature integral varifolds of
           codimension 1: regularity and compactness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.09669, 2019.
[BW20]     Costante Bellettini and Neshan Wickramasekera. The inhomogeneous allen–cahn equation and the ex-
           istence of prescribed-mean-curvature hypersurfaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.05847, 2020.
[Cha88]    Sheldon Xu-Dong Chang. Two-dimensional area minimizing integral currents are classical minimal sur-
           faces. Journal of the American Mathematical Society, 1(4):699–778, 1988.
[DG61]     Ennio De Giorgi. Frontiere orientate di misura minima. Seminario di Matematica della Scuola Normale
           Superiore di Pisa, pages 1–56, 1961.
[DLHM+ 22] Camillo De Lellis, Jonas Hirsch, Andrea Marchese, Luca Spolaor, and Salvatore Stuvard. Fine structure
           of the singular set of area minimizing hypersurfaces modulo p. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.10204, 2022.
[DLHMS20] Camillo De Lellis, Jonas Hirsch, Andrea Marchese, and Salvatore Stuvard. Regularity of area minimizing
           currents mod p. Geometric and Functional Analysis, 30(5):1224–1336, 2020.
[DLMS23] Camillo De Lellis, Paul Minter, and Anna Skorobogatova. The fine structure of the singular set of area-
           minimizing integral currents iii: Frequency 1 flat singular points and Hm−2 a.e. uniqueness of tangent
           cones. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11553, 2023.
118              BRANCH SET STRATIFICATION FOR STATIONARY VARIFOLDS

[DLS11]    Camillo De Lellis and Emanuele Spadaro. Q-valued functions revisited, volume 211. Memoirs of the
           American Mathematical Society, 2011.
[DLS14]    Camillo De Lellis and Emanuele Spadaro. Regularity of area minimizing currents i: gradient lp estimates.
           Geometric and Functional Analysis, 24(6):1831–1884, 2014.
[DLS15]    Camillo De Lellis and Emanuele Spadaro. Multiple valued functions and integral currents. Annali Scuola
           Normale Superiore-Classe Di Scienze, pages 1239–1269, 2015.
[DLS16a]   Camillo De Lellis and Emanuele Spadaro. Regularity of area minimizing currents ii: center manifold.
           Annals of Mathematics, pages 499–575, 2016.
[DLS16b]   Camillo De Lellis and Emanuele Spadaro. Regularity of area minimizing currents iii: blow-up. Annals
           of Mathematics, pages 577–617, 2016.
[DLS23]    Camillo De Lellis and Anna Skorobogatova. The fine structure of the singular set of area-minimizing
           integral currents ii: rectifiability of flat singular points with singularity degree larger than 1. arXiv
           preprint arXiv:2304.11555, 2023.
[DLS25]    Camillo De Lellis and Anna Skorobogatova. The fine structure of the singular set of area-minimizing
           integral currents I: the singularity degree of flat singular points. Ars Inven. Anal., pages Paper No. 3,
           61, 2025.
[Fed70]    Herbert Federer. The singular sets of area minimizing rectifiable currents with codimension one and of
           area minimizing flat chains modulo two with arbitrary codimension. 1970.
[FF60]     Herbert Federer and Wendell H Fleming. Normal and integral currents. Annals of Mathematics,
           72(3):458–520, 1960.
[GL86]     Nicola Garofalo and Fang-Hua Lin. Monotonicity properties of variational integrals, ap weights and
           unique continuation. Indiana University Mathematics Journal, 35(2):245–268, 1986.
[GL87]     Nicola Garofalo and Fang-Hua Lin. Unique continuation for elliptic operators: a geometric-variational
           approach. Communications on pure and applied mathematics, 40(3):347–366, 1987.
[Gua18]    Marco AM Guaraco. Min–max for phase transitions and the existence of embedded minimal hypersur-
           faces. Journal of Differential Geometry, 108(1):91–133, 2018.
[Hie20]    Fritz Hiesmayr. A bernstein theorem for two-valued minimal graphs in dimension four. arXiv preprint
           arXiv:2011.13792, 2020.
[HLW24]    Han Hong, Haizhong Li, and Gaoming Wang. On δ-stable minimal hypersurfaces in Rn+1 . arXiv preprint
           arXiv:2407.03222, 2024.
[HS24]     Jonas Hirsch and Luca Spolaor. Dimension of the singular set for 2-valued stationary lipschitz graphs.
           arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00279, 2024.
[HT00]     John E. Hutchinson and Yoshihiro Tonegawa. Convergence of phase interfaces in the van der Waals-
           Cahn-Hilliard theory. Calc. Var. Partial Differential Equations, 10(1):49–84, 2000.
[Kru14]    Brian Krummel. Regularity of minimal hypersurfaces with a common free boundary. Calculus of Vari-
           ations and Partial Differential Equations, 51(3-4):525–537, 2014.
[KW21]     Brian Krummel and Neshan Wickramasekera. Fine properties of branch point singularities: station-
           ary two-valued graphs and stable minimal hypersurfaces near points of density < 3. arXiv preprint
           arXiv:2111.12246, 2021.
[KW23a]    Brian Krummel and Neshan Wickramasekera. Analysis of singularities of area minimizing currents,
           Part I: planar frequency, branch points of rapid decay, and weak locally uniform approximation. arXiv
           preprint arXiv:2304.10653, 2023.
[KW23b]    Brian Krummel and Neshan Wickramasekera. Analysis of singularities of area minimizing currents,
           Part II: a uniform height bound, estimates away from branch points of rapid decay, and uniqueness of
           tangent cones. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10272, 2023.
[KW26a]    Brian Krummel and Neshan Wickramasekera. Analysis of singularities of area minimizing currents,
           Part III: branch points of planar frequency ̸= 2, higher order asymptotics and the local topology.
           Preprint, 2026.
[KW26b]    Brian Krummel and Neshan Wickramasekera. Analysis of singularities of area minimizing currents,
           Part IV: branch points of planar frequency ≥ 2, higher order asymptotics and the local topology.
           Preprint, 2026.
[KW26c]    Brian Krummel and Neshan Wickramasekera. Analysis of singularities of area minimizing currents,
           Part V: general Riemannian ambient manifolds. Preprint, 2026.
[LO77]     HB Lawson and R Osserman. Non-existence, non-uniqueness and irregularity of solutions to the minimal
           surface system. Acta Mathematica, 139:1–17, 1977.
[Min24]    Paul Minter. The structure of stable codimension one integral varifolds near classical cones of density
           q + 1/2. Calculus of Variations and Partial Differential Equations, 63(1):5, 2024.
[MS26]     Paul Minter and Sidney Stanbury. Area minimising hypersurfaces mod p do not admit immersed branch
           points. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.03100, 2026.
              BRIAN KRUMMEL, PAUL MINTER, AND NESHAN WICKRAMASEKERA                                            119

[MW95]      Mario J Micallef and Brian White. The structure of branch points in minimal surfaces and in pseudo-
            holomorphic curves. Annals of Mathematics, 141(1):35–85, 1995.
[MW24]      Paul Minter and Neshan Wickramasekera. A structure theory for stable codimension 1 integral vari-
            folds with applications to area minimising hypersurfaces mod p. Journal of the American Mathematical
            Society, 37(3):861–927, 2024.
[MX26]      Paul Minter and Zhengyi Xiao. An optimal regularity theory for immersed stable minimal hypersurfaces
            with small singular set. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.05041, 2026.
[Sim83]     Leon Simon. Lectures on Geometric Measure Theory. 1983.
[Sim96]     Leon Simon. Theorems on regularity and singularity of energy minimizing maps. Springer Science &
            Business Media, 1996.
[SS81]      Richard Schoen and Leon Simon. Regularity of stable minimal hypersurfaces. Communications on Pure
            and Applied Mathematics, 34(6):741–797, 1981.
[SSS25]     Anna Skorobogatova, Luca Spolaor, and Salvatore Stuvard. Structure of two-dimensional mod (q) area-
            minimizing currents near flat singularities: the codimension one case. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.17813,
            2025.
[SW16]      Leon Simon and Neshan Wickramasekera. A frequency function and singular set bounds for branched
            minimal immersions. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 69(7):1213–1258, 2016.
[TW12]      Yoshihiro Tonegawa and Neshan Wickramasekera. Stable phase interfaces in the van der waals–cahn–
            hilliard theory. Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik (Crelles Journal), 2012(668):191–210,
            2012.
[Whi83]     Brian White. Tangent cones to two-dimensional area-minimizing integral currents are unique. Duke
            Math. J., 50(1):143–160, 1983.
[Wic14]     Neshan Wickramasekera. A general regularity theory for stable codimension 1 integral varifolds. Annals
            of mathematics, pages 843–1007, 2014.


School of Mathematics & Statistics, University of Melbourne
Email address: brian.krummel@unimelb.edu.au

Department of Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics, University of Cambridge
Email address: pdtwm2@cam.ac.uk

Department of Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics, University of Cambridge
Email address: N.Wickramasekera@dpmms.cam.ac.uk
