                                             TYPICAL PROPERTIES OF POSITIVE CONTRACTIONS AND
                                                     THE INVARIANT SUBSPACE PROBLEM

                                                                                               by

                                                                                       Valentin Gillet




arXiv:2409.14481v1 [math.FA] 22 Sep 2024
                                                 Abstract. — In this paper, we ﬁrst study some elementary properties of a typical positive
                                                 contraction on ℓq for the SOT and the SOT˚ topologies. Using these properties we prove that
                                                 a typical positive contraction on ℓ1 (resp. on ℓ2 ) has a non-trivial invariant subspace for the
                                                 SOT topology (resp. the SOT and the SOT˚ topologies). We then focus on the case where X
                                                 is a Banach space with a basis. We prove that a typical positive contraction on a Banach
                                                 space with an unconditional basis has no non-trivial closed invariant ideals for the SOT and
                                                 the SOT˚ topologies. In particular this shows that when X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8, a typical
                                                 positive contraction T P pP1 pXq, SOTq (resp. T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q when 1 ă q ă 8) does
                                                 not satisfy the Abramovich, Aliprantis and Burkinshaw criterion, that is there is no non-
                                                 zero positive operator in the commutant of T which is quasinilpotent at a non-zero positive
                                                 vector of X. Finally we prove that, for the SOT˚ topology, a typical positive contraction on
                                                 a reﬂexive Banach space with a monotone basis does not satisfy the Abramovich, Aliprantis
                                                 and Burkinshaw criterion.




                                                                                     1. Introduction
                                              Throughout this paper, pX, k.kq will be a complex separable infinite-dimensional Banach
                                           space and H will be a complex separable infinite-dimensional Hilbert space. The space
                                           of all bounded operators on X equipped with the operator norm k.k will be denoted by
                                           BpXq.
                                              If M ą 0, we denote by BM pXq the closed ball of radius M of BpXq. With this notation
                                           the set B1 pXq ÿ
                                                          is just the set of contractions on X. If pen qně0 is a basis of X, we say that
                                           a vector x “       xn en of X is positive whenever xn ě 0 for all n ě 0. We write x ě 0
                                                          ně0
                                           when x is a positive vector of X. We say that an operator T P BpXq is positive whenever
                                           T x ě 0 for every x ě 0. The space of all bounded positive operators on X will be denoted
                                           by PpXq, and we denote by PM pXq :“ BM pXq X PpXq the positive operators in BM pXq.
                                              Given a topology τ on Y “ BM pXq or Y “ PM pXq that turns Y into a Baire space,
                                           we say that a property (P) of operators on X is typical for the topology τ if the set
                                           tT P Y : T satisfies the property (P)u is comeager in Y, that is contains a dense Gδ subset
                                           of Y. Since the space pB1 pXq, k.kq is usually not separable and so is not Polish, we will be
                                           focusing on the Strong Operator Topology and on the Strong* Operator Topology. Recall

                                           Key words and phrases. — Polish topologies, ℓp - spaces, typical properties of positive operators,
                                           quasinilpotent operators, invariant subspaces for positive operators.
2                                         V. GILLET

that the Strong Operator Topology is the topology on BpXq defined by the seminorms k.kx ,
where kT kx “ kT xk for every x P X. The Strong* Operator Topology is the topology on
BpXq defined by the seminorms k.kx and k.kx˚ , where kT kx “ kT xk and kT kx˚ “ kT ˚ x˚ k
for every x P X and every x˚ P X ˚ . If pTi q is a net in BpXq and T P BpXq, we have
                            SOT                k.k
                          Ti ÝÑ T ðñ Ti x ÝÑ T x for every x P X,
                             i                  i
and                               $
                                          k.k
                                  & Ti x ÝÑ
                                  ’           Tx       for every x P X,
                    SOT˚                   i
                 Ti ÝÑ T ðñ                 k.k
                      i           % Ti˚ x˚ ÝÑ T ˚ x˚ for every x˚ P X ˚ .
                                  ’
                                        i
                                  ˚
We now denote by SOT (resp. by SOT ) the Strong Operator Topology (resp. the Strong*
Operator Topology) on BpXq. For every M ą 0, the closed ball pBM pXq, SOTq is Polish
and when X ˚ is separable, the space pBM pXq, SOT˚ q is Polish.
   The notion of a typical property of contractions was first initiated by Eisner in [10]. She
proved in [10] that a typical contraction on a separable Hilbert space is unitary for the
Weak Operator Topology. This notion was studied in more depth by Eisner and Mátrai
for operators on a separable Hilbert space for others topologies as for example the SOT and
the SOT˚ topologies. It is proved in [11] that if H is a separable Hilbert space, a typical
T P pB1 pHq, SOTq is unitarily equivalent to the infinite-dimensional backward unilateral
shift operator on ℓ2 pZ` ˆ Z` q and in particular has a non-trivial invariant subspace, that
is a closed subspace Y Ď X such that Y ‰ t0u, Y ‰ X and T pY q Ď Y . Grivaux, Matheron
and Menet have also studied typical properties of contractions on ℓq -spaces ([13], [14]
and [15]). Their initial goal was to determine whether a typical T P pB1 pℓq q, SOTq or
T P pB1 pℓq q, SOT˚ q has a non-trivial invariant subspace or not.
   This motivation comes from the famous invariant subspace problem, which can be stated
as follows : given an infinite-dimensional separable complex Banach space Z, does every
bounded operator T P BpZq have a non-trivial invariant subspace? The answer to this
problem is negative for some non-reflexive Banach spaces : Enflo has constructed a non-
reflexive Banach space which supports an operator without non-trivial invariant subspace
(see [12]), and Read has constructed operators on ℓ1 and on c0 (called Read’s operators)
without non-trivial invariant subspace (see [23] and [24]). The invariant subspace problem
still remains open for reflexive Banach spaces and in particular for separable Hilbert spaces.
However the problem has a positive answer for some classes of operators : for example,
Lomonosov proved in [19] that if an operator T contains a non-scalar operator in its
commutant that commutes with a non-zero compact operator, then it has a non-trivial
invariant subspace; Brown, Chevreau and Pearcy proved in [6] that every contraction on a
Hilbert space whose spectrum contains the unit circle has a non-trivial invariant subspace.
The invariant subspace problem can be restricted to positive operators as follows : given
an infinite-dimensional complex Banach space Z with a basis, does every bounded positive
operator on Z has a non-trivial invariant subspace? The answer to this problem is still
unknown. Moreover, even if Read’s operators give a counter-example to the invariant
subspace problem on Z “ ℓ1 , it was proved in [25] that the modulus of a Read’s operator on
ℓ1 has a positive eigenvector and so the invariant subspace problem for positive operators
still remains open for the case Z “ ℓ1 . A major result regarding the existence of a
non-trivial invariant subspace for positive operators, due to Abramovich, Aliprantis and
Burkinshaw ([1, Theorem 2.2]), is the following.
                              TYPICAL ℓp - SPACE CONTRACTIONS                                 3

Theorem 1.1. — Let X be a Banach space with a basis and T be a positive operator on
X. If there exists a non-zero positive operator A on X which is quasinilpotent at a certain
non-zero positive vector of X and such that AT “ T A, then T has a non-trivial invariant
subspace.
   In particular Theorem 1.1 implies the following corollary.
Corollary 1.2. — Let X be a Banach space with a basis. Every positive operator on
X which is quasinilpotent at a non-zero positive vector of X has a non-trivial invariant
subspace.
   For more details on the invariant subspace problem and on known results on this subject,
we refer to [7], [8] and [21].
   The aim of this article is to study the invariant subspace problem from the point of view
of typicality, that is we are interested in the question whether a typical T P pP1 pXq, τ q has
a non-trivial invariant subspace or not, when τ “ SOT or τ “ SOT˚ . We will mostly focus
on the case X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8 but we will also generalize some results to Banach
spaces with an unconditional basis or with a monotone basis. In the case where X “ ℓq ,
the basis pen qně0 of X will be the canonical basis, where we recall that en pkq “ 1 if n “ k
and en pkq “ 0 if n ‰ k, for every n, k ě 0.

1a. Notations. — We introduce here some notation that will be used throughout the
article.
   - We denote by Qą0 the set of positive rational numbers.
   - The open unit disk of C will be denoted by D and the unit circle of C will be denoted
by T.
   - If Z is a Banach space, we denote by SZ the unit sphere of Z.
   - The closed linear span of pxi qiPI Ď X will be written as rxi : i P Is.
   - If X is a Banach space with a basis pen qně0 , we denote by EN the subspace re0 , ..., eN s
for every N ě 0 and by FN the subspace rej : j ą N s for every N ě 0.
   - If X is a Banach space with a basis pen qně0 , we denote by PN the canonical projection
onto EN and by QN the canonical projection onto FN . The biorthogonal functionals
sequence associated to the basis pen qně0 will be denoted by pe˚n qně0 .
   - If T P BpXq, we respectively write σpT q, σap pT q, σp pT q and σess pT q for the spectrum,
the approximate spectrum, the point spectrum and the essential spectrum of T .

1b. Main results. — We start this article by presenting in Section 2 some tools that
will be useful throughout the article. We properly define the notion of a positive oper-
ator on a Banach space with a basis. In particular Proposition 2.1 states that the set
of positive contractions on a Banach space with a basis is Polish for both the SOT and
the SOT˚ topologies, providing the necessary setting for the study of typical properties of
positive contractions.
   Theorem 2.6 connects the comeager sets of P1 pXq for the topologies SOT and SOT˚ in
the case where X “ ℓq with q ą 2.
   In Section 3, we put together some elementary properties of a typical positive contraction
for the SOT and the SOT˚ topologies. Proposition 3.1 will play an important role for Section
4 in order to study the invariant subspace problem for a typical positive contraction on ℓ2
and on ℓ1 .
4                                           V. GILLET

   We also study the point spectrum of a typical positive contraction on ℓq (Corollaries 3.3
and 3.4).
   Eisner and Mátrai proved in [11] that a typical T P pB1 pℓ2 q, SOTq is unitarily equivalent to
the infinite-dimensional backward unilateral shift operator on ℓ2 pZ` ˆZ` q and in particular
this implies that a typical contraction on ℓ2 has a non-trivial invariant subspace. To do so,
they proved first that a typical contraction T P pB1 pℓ2 q, SOTq is such that T ˚ is an isometry.
It turns out that this is no longer the case for positive contractions, that is the adjoint of
a typical positive contraction on ℓ2 is not an isometry for the SOT topology.
Proposition 1.3. — Let X “ ℓq with 1 ă q ă 8. A typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq (resp.
T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q) is such that T ˚ is not an isometry.
   The case X “ ℓ1 is very different from the case X “ ℓq with q ą 1, as the following
proposition shows.
Proposition 1.4. — If X “ ℓ1 , then a typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq is such that T ˚ is a
surjective isometry and such that T ´ λ is surjective for every λ P D.
   Proposition 1.3 shows in particular that a property can be typical in P1 pXq but can be
atypical in B1 pXq for a certain topology τ on B1 pXq.
   In Section 4, we first explain why a typical positive contraction on ℓ1 and on ℓ2 has a
non-trivial invariant subspace, and then we focus on the case where X is a Banach space
with a basis. In particular it includes the case X “ ℓq with 1 ă q ‰ 2 ă 8.
   We say that a positive operator on a Banach space X with a basis satisfies the
Abramovich, Aliprantis and Burkinshaw criterion (abbreviated AAB criterion) if this
operator satisfies the hypotheses of Theorem 1.1. Any positive operator on a Banach
space X with a basis satisfying the AAB criterion has a non-trivial invariant subspace and
when X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8, any operator satisfying the AAB criterion has a non-trivial
closed invariant ideal ([2, Theorem 2.2]), that is a closed vector subspace V of X such
that |x| ď |y| and y P V imply x P V , for every x, y P X. Here |x| is the positive vector
of X whose coordinates are the modulus of the coordinates of the vector x P X. Troitsky
and Radjavi gave the following characterization of positive operators on a Banach space
with an unconditional basis admitting a non-trivial invariant closed ideal ([22, Proposition
1.2]).
Proposition 1.5. — Let X be a Banach space with an unconditional basis pen qně0 and
let T be a positive operator on X. The operator T has no non-trivial closed invariant ideals
if and only if the following property holds :
                           @ i ‰ j P Z` , Dn P Z` : xe˚j , T n ei y ą 0.
   Thanks to this characterization, we obtain the following result.
Proposition 1.6. — Let X be a Banach space with an unconditional basis. A typical
T P pP1 pXq, SOTq (resp. T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q when X ˚ is separable) has no non-trivial
closed invariant ideals.
   In particular, Proposition 1.6 implies the following corollary.
Corollary 1.7. — Let X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8. A typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq (resp.
T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q when 1 ă q ă 8) does not satisfy the AAB criterion.
   The main result of this article is the following generalization of Corollary 1.7 for the
SOT˚ topology to Banach spaces with a monotone basis.
Theorem 1.8. — Let X be a reflexive Banach space with a monotone basis. A typical
T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q does not satisfy the AAB criterion.
                               TYPICAL ℓp - SPACE CONTRACTIONS                                   5

  Finally we end Section 4 with the following result.
Corollary 1.9. — Let X be a Banach space with a basis. A typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq
(resp. T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q when X ˚ is separable) is not quasinilpotent at any non-zero
positive vector of X.
  These results highlight the fact that the existence of invariant subspaces for typical
operators is a delicate matter, even in the restricted setting of positive contractions.


                                        2. Useful tools
2a. Positive operators on X. — If X is a Banach space with a basis pen qně0 , we
denote by C ` the positive cone of X, that is :
                                  ÿ
                     C ` :“ tx “     xn en : xn ě 0, for every n ě 0u.
                                    ně0

   We have C ` ` C ` Ď C ` , αC ` Ď C ` for every α ě 0 and C ` X p´C ` q “ t0u. If x P X,
we write x ě 0 when x P C ` . We define a partial order on C ` by letting x ď y when
y ´ x P C`.
   An operator T : X Ñ X is said to be positive (respect to the basis pen qně0 ) whenever
T pC ` q Ď C ` , that is when T x ě 0 for every x ě 0. We write T ě 0 when T is a positive
operator, and we write PpXq the space of all bounded positive operators on X.
   Let pti,j qi,jě0 be the matrix of T respect to the basis pen qně0 (with ti,j “ xe˚i , T ej y for
every i, j ě 0). Then T is a positive operator if and only if ti,j ě 0 for every i, j ě 0.
   We notice that if S, T are two positive operators on X then for every λ ě 0, the operators
ST , λS and S ` T are also positive. Moreover the projections PN are positive on X.
   Recall that if M ą 0, we write PM pXq the set of all positive operators on X with norm
at most equal to M . In particular if M “ 1, the set P1 pXq is just the positive contractions
on X.
   Our aim in this note is to investigate typical properties of positive contractions for
the SOT topology and the SOT˚ topology and more precisely we would like to know if
the property to have a non-trivial invariant subspace is a typical property of positive
contractions or not. The first step in this investigation is to check that pP1 pXq, SOTq and
pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q are Polish spaces. We notice that for every M ą 0, the space PM pXq
is closed in BM pXq for the SOT topology (and hence for the SOT˚ topology), and since
pBM pXq, SOTq is Polish when X is separable and pBM pXq, SOT˚ q is Polish when X ˚ is
separable (see [9, Page 256, Proposition 1.3]), we have the following result.
Proposition 2.1. — Let X be a Banach space with a basis. For every M ą 0, the space
pPM pXq, SOTq is Polish. If moreover X ˚ is separable, then the space pPM pXq, SOT˚ q is
Polish for every M ą 0.

2b. A tool for proving density results. — When we study typical properties of pos-
itive contractions, we have to prove that certain sets of operators are dense in P1 pXq. The
following lemma is very useful for this.
Lemma 2.2. — Let X be a Banach space with a monotone basis pen qně0 . Let CpXq be a
class of operators on X and define CM pXq :“ CpXq X PM pXq for every M ą 0.
   Let M ą 0. Suppose that the following property holds : there exists an index p P Z` such
that for every ε ą 0, every N P Z` with N ě p and every positive operator A P PpEN q
6                                                     V. GILLET

with kAk ă M , there exists a positive operator T P CM pXq such that
(2.1)                         kpT ´ Aq ek k ă ε          for every          0 ď k ď N.
  Then CM pXq is dense in pPM pXq, SOTq. If X has a shrinking monotone basis pen qně0
and if the the condition (2.1) is replaced by the following condition
(2.2)        kpT ´ Aq ek k ă ε        and    kpT ´ Aq˚ e˚k k ă ε             for every     0 ď k ď N,
then CM pXq is dense in pPM         pXq, SOT˚ q.
Proof. — We will prove the lemma for the SOT˚ topology.
   Let T0 P PM pXq, let ε ą 0, let x1 , ..., xs P X and let y1˚ , ..., ys˚ P X ˚ . Without loss
of generality we can suppose that kT0 k ă M . We are looking for a positive operator
T P CM pXq such that
(2.3)                       max maxtkpT ´ T0 qxj k, kpT ´ T0 q˚ yj˚ ku ă ε.
                            1ďjďs

For every 1 ď j ď s, there exist two indices Nj and Nj1 such that
                      Nj                                                    N1
                      ÿ                      ε                              ÿj                     ε
               xj ´         e˚k pxj qek   ă            and          yj˚ ´         e˚˚  ˚ ˚
                                                                                   k pyj qek ă       .
                      k“0
                                            4M                              k“0
                                                                                                  4M

Let N0 “ max tNj , Nj1 , pu P Z` .
         1ďjďs
    We claim that if the following inequality
                                                                                           ε
(2.4)                       max maxtkpT ´ T0 qek k, kpT ´ T0 q˚ e˚k ku ă
                        0ďkďN0                                                            2α
holds with                                  #                                         +
                                                N0
                                                ÿ                   N0
                                                                    ÿ
                             α :“ max                kxj kke˚k k,        kyj˚ kke˚˚
                                                                                 k k ,
                                    1ďjďs
                                                k“0                 k“0
then the inequality (2.3) holds too. Indeed if (2.4) holds, we have for every 1 ď j ď s :
                                                      Nj                                   Nj
                                                      ÿ                                    ÿ
          kpT ´ T0 qxj k ď kpT ´ T0 qpxj ´                  e˚k pxj qek qk ` kpT ´ T0 q          e˚k pxj qek k
                                                      k“0                                  k“0
                                     N
                                     ÿ0
                                ε
                            ă     `  ke˚ pxj qkkpT ´ T0 qek k
                                2 k“0 k
                            ăε
and likewise we have
                                            kpT ´ T0 q˚ yj˚ k ă ε.
  Now for every N ě N0 , we consider the positive operator AN :“ PN T0 PN . Since the
basis is monotone and kT0 k ă M we have that kAN k ă M , so there exists a positive
operator T P CM pXq such that
                                                                  ε
                    max maxtkpT ´ AN qek k, kpT ´ AN q˚ e˚k ku ă    .
                   0ďkďN                                         4α
Now for every 0 ď k ď N :
                      kpT ´ T0 qek k ď kpT ´ AN qek k ` kpPN T0 PN ´ T0 qek k
                                        ε
                                     ă    ` kpPN ´ IqT0 ek k
                                       4α
                               TYPICAL ℓp - SPACE CONTRACTIONS                                7

and
                                                  ε
                           kpT ´ T0 q˚ e˚k k ă      ` kpPN ´ Iq˚ T0˚ e˚k k.
                                                 4α
           SOT˚
Since PN ÝÑ I, we can choose N P Z` large enough such that
          N Ñ8
                                                                               ε
                    max maxtkpPN ´ IqT0 ek k, kpPN ´ Iq˚ T0˚ e˚k ku ă            ,
                   0ďkďN                                                      4α
and the inequality (2.4) follows. This proves Lemma 2.2.
Remark 2.3. — The hypothesis "for every positive operator A P P1 pEN q with kAk ă M "
in Lemma 2.2 can be replaced by "for every positive operator A P P1 pEN q with kAk ă M
and with xe˚k , Ael y ą 0 for every 0 ď k, l ď N ". Indeed the operators AN in the proof of
Lemma 2.2 can be approximated in the SOT˚ -topology by operators on EN whose matrices
have positive entries.
Remark 2.4. — Lemma 2.2 requires the basis pen qně0 to be monotone. Notice that the
norm |||.||| defined by |||x||| “ sup kPN xk is equivalent to the norm k.k and that when X is
                                N ě0
equipped with this norm, the basis pen qně0 becomes monotone.

2c. Topological 0-1 law for positive operators. — We suppose in this subsection
that X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8 and we consider the set
                  Iso` pXq :“ tT P P1 pXq : T is a surjective isometry of Xu.
   It is a classical fact (see [18, Proposition 2.f.14]) that if 1 ă q ‰ 2 ă 8, every surjective
isometry T of X has the form
                      T x “ pεn xσpnq qně0 ,     for every x “ pxn qně0 P X,
where σ : Z` Ñ Z` is a bijection of Z` and where pεn qně0 is a sequence of numbers such
that |εn | “ 1 for every n ě 0 . It follows that every positive surjective isometry of X has
the form
                        T x “ pxσpnq qně0 , for every x “ pxn qně0 P X,
where σ : Z` Ñ Z` is a bijection of Z` . In fact every positive surjective isometry of ℓ2
also has this form. Indeed if T : ℓ2 Ñ ℓ2 is a positive surjective isometry of ℓ2 , then for
every i, j ě 0 with i ‰ j, we have that
                                             ÿ
(2.5)                       xT ei , T ej y “   xe˚k , T ei y xe˚k , T ej y “ 0.
                                           kě0

So using the fact that every coefficient in (2.5) is non-negative, we have that
(2.6)                      xe˚k , T ei y xe˚k , T ej y “ 0 for every k ě 0,
that is T ei and T ej have disjoint supports. Now since we know that the vectors T ei for
i ě 0 have mutually disjoint supports, the proof given in [18, Proposition 2.f.14] also works
for the positive surjective isometries of ℓ2 .
   From this description of the positive surjective isometries of ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8, it
follows that Iso` (X) is a group. We say that a subset A of P1 pXq is Iso` pXq - invariant
if JAJ ´1 “ A for every J P Iso` pXq. The following result shows that every property of
positive contractions that we will consider in this article is either typial or atypical when
X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8.
8                                             V. GILLET

Proposition 2.5. — Let X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8. If A Ď pP1 pXq, SOTq has the Baire
property and is Iso` pXq - invariant, then A is either meager or comeager in pP1 pXq, SOTq.
If 1 ă q ă 8 and if A Ď pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q has the Baire property and is Iso` pXq - invariant,
then A is either meager or comeager in pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q
Proof. — The proof given in [14, Proposition 3.2] relying on [17, Theorem 8.46] works in
exactly the same way for positive contractions.

2d. Similar topologies. — The aim of this subsection is to link the topologies SOT and
SOT˚ on P1 pXq in terms of comeager sets when X “ ℓq with q ą 2. The main result of
this subsection is the following.
Theorem 2.6. — Let X “ ℓq with q ą 2. The Baire spaces pP1 pXq, SOTq and
pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q have the same comeager sets.
   The proof of Theorem 2.6 is very similar to the proof of [15, Theorem 3.4] but we have
to adapt the proof given in [15] to positive contractions. Indeed the proof given in [15] uses
[15, Corollary 2.10] which works in P1 pXq and uses the two propositions [14, Proposition
5.15] and [14, Proposition 5.16], and these two propositions can easily be adapted to
positive contractions as soon as [14, Lemma 5.17] can be adapted to positive contractions.
   We first introduce some terminology. We say that two topologies τ and τ 1 on Y “ P1 pℓq q
are similar if they have the same dense sets. Similar topologies have the same comeager sets
([15, Lemma 2.1]), and simple examples show that the converse is not true ([15, Remark
2.2]). We write iτ,τ 1 the identity map from pY, τ q to pY, τ 1 q and Cpτ, τ 1 q the set of all points
of continuity of this map.
   A vector x P X is said to be norming for an operator A P BpXq if }x} “ 1 and
}Ax} “ }A}. Given N ě 0, we will say that an operator A P PpEN q is absolutely exposing
if the set of all norming vectors for A consists only of unimodular multiples of a single
vector x0 P SEN . We denote by E1 pEN q the set of absolutely exposing positive operators
A P P1 pEN q.
   The only part of the proof given in [15] that we have to adapt is [14, Lemma 5.17].
We have to slightly modify the expression of the operators Aδ involved in the proof of
[14, Lemma 5.17] to obtain positive contractions. We recall that if x is a vector of X, we
denote by |x| the positive vector of X whose coordinates are the modulus of the coordinates
of x. We thus have to prove the following lemma.
Lemma 2.7. — The set E1 pEN q is dense in P1 pEN q.
Proof. — Let A P P1 pEN q with A ‰ 0 and }A} ă 1. Let x0 P EN be such that kx0 k “ 1
and }Ax0 } “ }A}. Since the vector |x0 | is also a norming vector for A, we can suppose
without loss of generality that x0 ě 0.
   By the Hahn-Banach theorem, there exists a functional x˚0 P EN             ˚ such that }x˚ } “
                                                                                                 0
                                                                                             N
                                                                                             ÿ
xx˚0 , x0 y “ 1. We can also suppose that x˚0 is positive functional. Indeed if x˚0 “            βj e˚j ,
                                                                                              j“0
                                                              N
                                                              ÿ
we consider the positive functional defined by y0˚ “              |βj |e˚j . Using Hölder’s inequality
                                                              j“0
we can show that ky0˚ k ď 1, and moreover we have that |xx˚0 , x0 y| ď xy0˚ , x0 y ď ky0˚ k ď 1,
so ky0˚ k “ 1 “ xy0˚ , x0 y.
   Let R0 be the positive rank 1 operator on EN defined by R0 pxq :“ xx˚0 , xy Ax0 , for
every x P EN ; and for any δ ą 0, let Aδ be the operator defined by Aδ :“ A ` δR0 . The
                             TYPICAL ℓp - SPACE CONTRACTIONS                              9

operators Aδ are now positive. As in the proof of [14, Lemma 5.17], we can prove that Aδ
is absolutely exposing and given ε ą 0, one can choose δ ą 0 so small that }Aδ } ă 1 and
}A ´ Aδ } ă ε, because kAk ă 1. This proves that E1 pEN q is dense in P1 pEN q.
   Since the proof of [15, Theorem 3.4] can now be adapted to positive contractions thanks
to Lemma 2.7, we can state the following results.
Theorem 2.8. — Let X “ ℓq with q ą 2. Then the topologies SOT and SOT˚ are similar
on P1 pXq.
Corollary 2.9. — Let X “ ℓq with q ą 2. The Baire spaces pP1 pXq, SOTq and
pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q have the same comeager sets.


         3. Some elementary properties of typical positive contractions
   In this section, we study some elementary properties of a typical positive contraction on
ℓq for the SOT and the SOT˚ topologies. These properties will be useful for the next section
to prove that a typical positive contraction on ℓ1 and on ℓ2 has a non-trivial invariant
subspace.
Proposition 3.1. — Let X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8. A typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq has the
following properties :
(a) kT k “ 1;
(b) }T n x} Ñ 0 as n Ñ 8 for all x P X;
(c) T is not invertible;
(d) σap pT q “ σpT q “ D.
If 1 ă q ă 8, a typical T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q also has these properties.
Proof. — The property (a) follows from the fact that the set
                               A :“ tT P P1 pXq : kT k “ 1u
can be written as
                             č ď                              1
                        A“           tT P P1 pXq : kT xk ą 1 ´ u.
                             kě1 xPS
                                                              k
                                    X

So A is a SOT-Gδ subset of P1 pXq (and hence a SOT˚ -Gδ subset of P1 pXq).
Moreover if T is a positive contraction and if we set TN “ PN T PN ` QN for every N ě 0,
                                                  SOT˚
then TN belongs to A and we easily see that TN ÝÑ T , so A is dense in P1 pXq for both
                                                  nÑ8
the SOT and the SOT˚ topologies.
   The proof of properties (b), (c) and (d) can be easily adapted from [14, Propositions 3.7
to 3.9] to positive contractions.
  Recall that an operator T P BpXq is said to be hypercyclic if there is a vector x P X
such that the orbit Opx, T q :“ tT n x : n P Nu is dense in X. Such a vector is said to be
hypercyclic for T . We refer to [4] and [16] for background on hypercyclicity.
Proposition 3.2. — Let X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8. For any M ą 1, the set
                              tT P PM pXq : T is hypercyclicu
is comeager in pPM pXq, SOTq and in pPM pXq, SOT˚ q. In particular, a typical positive con-
traction T P pP1 pXq, SOTq is such that 2T is hypercyclic.
   If 1 ă q ă 8, a typical T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q is such that 2T and p2T q˚ are hypercylics.
10                                             V. GILLET

Proof. — Using [4, Theorem 5.41] and replacing the property of being mixing in the Gaus-
sian sense by the property of being hypercyclic in [13, Lemma 2.8], we notice that the proof
given in [13, Proposition 2.3] works for any 1 ď q ă 8 in PM pXq. When 1 ă q ă 8,
the map T ÞÑ T ˚ is an homeomorphism from pP2 pXq, SOT˚ q to pP2 pXq, SOT˚ q, so an SOT˚ -
typical T P P1 pXq is such that p2T q˚ is hypercyclic too.

   Using the fact that a hypercyclic operator T is such that σp pT ˚ q “ H, we have the
following result.
Corollary 3.3. — Let X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8. An SOT-typical T P P1 pXq is such that
T ˚ has no eigenvalue. If 1 ă q ă 8, an SOT˚ -typical T P P1 pXq is such that T and T ˚
have no eigenvalue.
  Using Corollary 2.9, we also have the following result.
Corollary 3.4. — Let X “ ℓq with q ą 2. An SOT-typical T P P1 pXq is such that T has
no eigenvalue.
  The next corollary is an exact analogue of [14, Proposition 3.9].
Corollary 3.5. — If X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8, a typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq is such that
T ´ λ has dense range for every λ P C. If q ą 1, a typical T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q is such that
T ´ λ has dense range for every λ P C.
Proof. — This is clear from Proposition 3.2 because a hypercyclic operator T is such that
T ´ λ has dense range for every λ P C; when q ą 2, we use the fact that the topologies SOT
and SOT˚ are similar by Theorem 2.8.
   Our next step is to investigate whether a typical T P P1 pXq is such that T ˚ is an
isometry or not. The following fact that we already proved in Subsection 2c will be useful
for this.
Fact 3.6. — If T is a positive isometry of X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8, then the vectors T ei
for i ě 0 have mutually disjoint supports.
   By [11, Proposition 5.15] and [14, Corollary 3.5], we know that an SOT-typical T P B1 pℓ2 q
is such that T ˚ is an isometry. We prove that this is no longer the case for a typical positive
contraction on ℓ2 .
Proposition 3.7. — Let X “ ℓq with 1 ă q ă 8. A typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq (resp.
T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q) is such that T ˚ is not an isometry.
Proof. — The arguments given in [14, Proposition 5.1] also apply in this case. We will
detail a bit the denseness argument. Let
                              I ˚ :“ tT P P1 pXq : T ˚ is an isometryu.
     By Fact 3.6 we have that
                    ď
             A :“       tT P P1 pXq : xe˚0 , T ej y ‰ 0 and xe˚1 , T ej y ‰ 0u Ď P1 pXqzI ˚
                    jě0

and the set A is SOT-open in P1 pXq, so A is a SOT-Gδ of P1 pXq and hence SOT˚ -Gδ . It
remains to prove that A is dense in pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q. Let ε ą 0, let T P P1 pXq with kT k ă 1
and let x1 , ..., xn P X and y1˚ , ..., yn˚ P X ˚ . We have to find a positive operator S in the set
A such that
(3.1)                       max maxtkpT ´ Sq xl k, kpT ´ Sq˚ yl˚ ku ă ε.
                           1ďlďn
                            TYPICAL ℓp - SPACE CONTRACTIONS                              11

Consider the positive operator Sδ defined by Sδ pxq “ T x ` δ xe˚0 , xy pe0 ` e1 q for every
x P X, where δ is a positive number that we will define later on. We have that
                              xe˚0 , Sδ e0 y xe˚1 , Sδ e0 y ě δ2 ą 0.
For every x P X, we have that
                                  kSδ xk ď pkT k ` 2δqkxk
and for every 1 ď l ď n, we have that
                 kpT ´ Sδ q xl k ď 2δkxl k and       kpT ´ Sδ q˚ yl˚ k ď 2δkyl˚ k.
If we choose δ ą 0 such that
               1 ´ kT k
           δă           , 2δkxl k ă ε and 2δkyl˚ k ă ε for every 1 ď l ď n,
                   2
then the operator Sδ is a positive contraction of A satisfying (3.1). This concludes the
proof of Proposition 3.7.
   The case X “ ℓ1 is very different from the case X “ ℓq with q ą 1. We have the following
result which will be useful in Section 4 to identify the point spectrum of an SOT-typical
positive contraction on ℓ1 .
Proposition 3.8. — Let X “ ℓ1 . An SOT-typical T P P1 pXq is such that T ˚ is a surjective
isometry and such that T ´ λ is surjective for every λ P D.
Proof. — The proof works exactly as in [14, Theorem 4.1]. Indeed the set
                          I ˚ :“ tT P P1 pXq : T ˚ is an isometryu
is a SOT-Gδ of P1 pXq (see [14, Theorem 4.1]) and the set I ˚ is also SOT-dense in P1 pXq
since all the operators involved in the proof of [14, Theorem 4.1] are positive. The second
part of the proof immediately follows as in [14, Theorem 4.1].
   Finally we describe the essential spectrum of a typical positive contraction on X “ ℓq
with 1 ď q ă 8. This will be useful to prove that a typical positive contraction on ℓ1 has a
non-trivial invariant subspace. Recall that an operator T P BpXq is Fredholm if its kernel
is finite-dimensional and its range has finite codimension, and it is upper semi-Fredholm if
its range is closed and its kernel is finite-dimensional. Every Fredholm operator is upper
semi-Fredholm. An operator is semi-Fredholm if it is upper semi-Fredholm or if its range
has finite codimension. We denote by Φ` pXq the set of all upper semi-Fredholm operators
on X. The set Φ` pXq is norm-open in BpXq. We refer to [20] for background on Fredholm
operators. The first lemma that we will use is the following analogue of [15, Fact 7.14].
Lemma 3.9. — Let X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8 and let λ P D. A typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq
(resp. T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q when 1 ă q ă 8) has the following property :
   For every ε ą 0 and every n ě 1, there exists a subspace E of X with n ă dimpEq ă 8
such that k pT ´ λq|E k ă ε.
Proof. — Let G be the set of all operators T P P1 pXq satisfying this property. Then
           č
      G“      tT P P1 pXq : D E subspace of X, n ă dimpEq ă 8, k pT ´ λq|E k ă 2´p u.
         pě0
         ně1

For every subspace E of X satisfying n ă dimpEq ă 8, the set

                        ΛE,p :“ tT P P1 pXq : k pT ´ λq|E k ă 2´p u
is SOT-open (see [15, Fact 7.14]), so G is SOT-Gδ in P1 pXq and hence SOT˚ -Gδ in P1 pXq.
12                                         V. GILLET

     Moreover if T is a positive contraction and if we set TN “ PN T PN ` λ QN for every
                                                                                SOT˚
N ě 0, then TN is a positive contraction which belongs to G, and TN ÝÑ T . So G is
                                                                               N Ñ8
dense in P1 pXq for the SOT and the SOT˚ topologies.
  With Lemma 3.9, we obtain the following description of the essential spectrum of a
typical positive contraction.
Proposition 3.10. — Let X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8. A typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq (resp.
T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q when 1 ă q ă 8) is such that T ´ λ is not upper semi-Fredholm for
every λ P D and such that σess pT q “ D.
Proof. — The proof given in [15, Proposition 7.13] works in our case since Lemma 3.9 is
working in P1 pXq for the topologies SOT and SOT˚ .


                         4. Invariant subspaces and typicality
   We now come to our main purpose in this paper, which is to investigate whether a
typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq (resp. T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q) has a non-trivial invariant subspace or
not. We will in fact see that this is not an easy question to answer. A first observation
is that the property of having a non-trivial invariant subspace is either typical or atypical
([14, Corollary 3.3]).
Proposition 4.1. — Let X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8. Either a typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq
(resp. T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q when 1 ă q ă 8) has a non-trivial invariant subspace, or a
typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq (resp. T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q when 1 ă q ă 8) does not have a
non-trivial invariant subspace.
   An important result from Brown, Chevreau and Pearcy ([6]) states that every contrac-
tion on a Hilbert space whose spectrum contains the unit circle has a non-trivial invariant
subspace. Since a typical T P pP1 pℓ2 q, SOTq (resp. T P pP1 pℓ2 q, SOT˚ q) is such that σpT q “ D
by Proposition 3.1, we have the following result as in [14, Corollary 7.3].
Theorem 4.2. — A typical T P pP1 pℓ2 q, SOTq (resp. T P pP1 pℓ2 q, SOT˚ q) has a non-trivial
invariant subspace.

4a. Invariant subspace of typical positive contractions on ℓ1 . — In this subsec-
tion, we consider the case where X “ ℓ1 . We will prove that a typical positive contraction
on X “ ℓ1 has a non-trivial invariant subspace, and even has eigenvalues.
   By Proposition 3.1 and Proposition 3.8, we know that a typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq is
such that T ´ λ is surjective for every λ P D and such that σpT q “ D. This implies that a
typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq is such that T ´ λ is not injective for every λ P D. Thus we have
the following results.
Theorem 4.3. — Let X “ ℓ1 . A typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq is such that σp pT q “ D and
such that dim(Ker(T ´ λ)) “ 8 for every λ P D.
Proof of Theorem 4.3. — The proof is motivated by [14, Remark 4.5]. By Propositions
3.8 and 3.10, a typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq is not Fredholm and is surjective, so a typical
T P pP1 pXq, SOTq is such that dim(Ker(T )) “ 8. But a typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq is such
that T ´ λ is semi-Fredholm for every λ P D (because is surjective). By the continuity of
the Fredholm index, Ind(T ´ λ) does not depend of λ P D. So a typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq
is such that Ind(T ´ λ) = dim(Ker(T ´ λ)) “ 8 for every λ P D.
                             TYPICAL ℓp - SPACE CONTRACTIONS                               13

Corollary 4.4. — Let X “ ℓ1 . A typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq has a non-trivial invariant
subspace.
   Hence the cases X “ ℓ2 and X “ ℓ1 are fully understood. We will now see that the
problem is more difficult in the other cases, which is not surprising because the problem is
still open in B1 pXq when X “ ℓq with 1 ă q ‰ 2 ă 8 for the topologies SOT and SOT˚ .

4b. Invariant subspace of typical positive contractions on a Banach space with
a basis. — We now focus on the case where X is a Banach space with a basis. In
particular it includes the case X “ ℓq with 1 ă q ‰ 2 ă 8.
  We start with a similar result to [14, Proposition 5.24] in the case where X “ ℓq with
1 ď q ă 8.
  Recall that an operator T P BpXq is polynomially bounded if there exists C ą 0 such
that for every complex polynomial P :
                                  kP pT qk ď C sup |P pzq|.
                                                 |z|“1

Every contraction on ℓ2 is polynomially bounded by Von Neumann’s inequality. A remark-
able result of Ambrozie and Müller [3] states that every polynomially bounded operator
                           SOT
T P BpXq such that T n ÝÑ 0 and T Ď σpT q has a non-trivial invariant subspace. We
                          nÑ8
                                                     SOT
know that a typical T P P1 pXq is such that T n ÝÑ 0 and σpT q “ D by Proposition 3.1,
                                                    nÑ8
so it is natural to ask whether a typical T P P1 pXq is polynomially bounded or not.
Proposition 4.5. — Let X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ‰ 2 ă 8. A typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq (resp.
T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q when 1 ă q ‰ 2 ă 8 ) is not polynomially bounded.
Proof. — The proof given in [14, Proposition 5.24] can be easily adapted to positive con-
tractions on X.
  Recall that a positive operator on a Banach space with a basis is said to be satisfying
the AAB criterion if it satisfies the following theorem (already stated in the introduction)
due to Abramovich, Aliprantis and Burkinshaw ([1, Theorem 2.2]).
Theorem 4.6. — Let X be a Banach space with a basis and let T be a positive operator
on X. If there exists a non-zero positive operator A on X which is quasinilpotent at a
certain non-zero positive vector of X and such that AT “ T A, then T has a non-trivial
invariant subspace.
   Recall also that by [2, Theorem 2.2], any positive operator on ℓq satisfying the AAB
criterion has a non-trivial closed invariant ideal, that is a closed vector subspace V of ℓq
such that |x| ď |y| and y P V imply x P V , for every x, y P ℓq . Moreover by [22, Proposition
1.2], a positive operator on a Banach space with an unconditional basis pen qně0 has no
non-trivial closed invariant ideals if and only if it satisfies the following condition :
                          @ i ‰ j P Z` , Dn P Z` : xe˚j , T n ei y ą 0.

  The following result shows that a typical positive contraction on a Banach space with
an unconditional basis has no non-trivial closed invariant ideals.
Proposition 4.7. — Let X be a Banach space with an unconditional basis pen qně0 . A
typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq (resp. T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q when X ˚ is separable) has no non-trivial
closed invariant ideals.
14                                            V. GILLET

Proof. — Consider the set
            G :“ tT P P1 pXq : @ i ‰ j P Z` , D n P Z` such that xe˚j , T n ei y ą 0u.
Then                       č ď                                             č
                     G“             tT P P1 pXq : xe˚j , T n ei y ą 0u “           Gi,j ,
                           i,jě0 ně0                                       i,jě0
                            i‰j                                             i‰j
with                 ď
           Gi,j :“       tT P P1 pXq : xe˚j , T n ei y ą 0u for every i, j ě 0 with i ‰ j.
                     ně0
Each Gi,j is easily seen to be SOT-open (and hence SOT˚ -open) because the map T ÞÑ T n is
continuous on P1 pXq for the SOT topology. Let us now show that every Gi,j is SOT˚ -dense in
P1 pXq. Let ε ą 0, let T P P1 pXq with kT k ă 1 and let x1 , ..., xn P X and y1˚ , ..., yn˚ P X ˚ .
We have to find a positive operator S in the set Gi,j such that
(4.1)                      max maxtkpT ´ Sq xl k, kpT ´ Sq˚ yl˚ ku ă ε.
                           1ďlďn
Consider the positive operator Sδ defined by Sδ pxq “ T x ` δ xe˚i , xy ej for every x P X,
where δ is a positive number that we will define later on. We have that
                                         xe˚j , Sδ ei y ě δ ą 0.
For every x P X, we have that
                                   kSδ xk ď pkT k ` δke˚i kkej kqkxk
and for every 1 ď l ď n, we have that
          kpT ´ Sδ q xl k ď δkxl kke˚i kkej k and       kpT ´ Sδ q˚ yl˚ k ď δkyl˚ kke˚i kkej k.
If we choose δ ą 0 such that
        1 ´ kT k
   δă ˚            , δkxl kke˚i kkej k ă ε and δkyl˚ kke˚i kkej k ă ε for every 1 ď l ď n,
        kei kkej k
then the operator Sδ is a positive contraction of Gi,j satisfying (4.1). This proves that each
Gi,j is SOT˚ -dense in P1 pXq and this concludes the proof of Proposition 4.7.
   In particular we obtain the following result in the case where X “ ℓq .
Corollary 4.8. — Let X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8. A typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq (resp.
T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q when 1 ă q ă 8) does not satifsy the AAB criterion.
   Let X be a Banach space with a basis. Since any positive operator on X that is
quasinilpotent at a non-zero positive vector of X satisfies the AAB criterion, we immedi-
ately get the following result.
Corollary 4.9. — Let X “ ℓq with 1 ď q ă 8. A typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq (resp.
T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q when 1 ă q ă 8) is not quasinilpotent at any non-zero positive vector
of X.
   We now would like to extend Corollary 4.8 to other Banach spaces with a basis. The
following lemma will be very useful for what follows.
Lemma 4.10. — Let X be a Banach space with a basis pen qně0 , let A be a non-zero
positive operator on X and let y P X be such that y ě 0 and y ‰ 0. Let j P Z` be such
that xe˚j , yy :“ αj ą 0. If
                                    aj,j :“ xe˚j , Aej y ą 0,
then the operator A is not quasinilpotent at y.
                                    TYPICAL ℓp - SPACE CONTRACTIONS                               15

Proof. — First we remark that Aej ě aj,j ej . Since
                                        ÿ
                           xe˚j , Ayy “   xe˚j , Aek y xe˚k , yy ,
                                            kě0
               ˚
we also have xej , Ayy ě aj,j αj . It follows that Ay ě αj aj,j ej and by induction we easily
get that
                                    Ak y ě αj akj,j ej   for every k ě 1.
  In particular we get that
                          kAk ykke˚j k ě xe˚j , Ak yy ě αj akj,j    for every k ě 1
and thus
                                       lim inf kAk yk1{k ě aj,j ą 0.
                                         kÑ8
This shows that the operator A cannot be quasinilpotent at y and this concludes the proof
of Lemma 4.10.
   The main result of this paper is the following generalization of Corollary 4.8.
Theorem 4.11. — Let pX, k.kq be a reflexive Banach space with a monotone basis
pen qně0 . A typical T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q does not satisfy the AAB criterion.
Proof. — We denote by F the set
                          F “ tT P P1 pXq : T satisties the AAB criterionu.
 By Lemma 4.10 we have
   ď
FĎ    tT P P1 pXq : DA P P1 pXq such that A ‰ 0, AT “ T A and xe˚p , Aep y “ 0u
       pě0
       ď ď       ď
  Ď                      tT P P1 pXq : DA P P1 pXq such that xe˚j , Aei y ě η, AT “ T A and xe˚p , Aep y “ 0u
       pě0 i,jě0 ηPQą0
       ď ď       ď
  Ď                      Fi,j,η,p
       pě0 i,jě0 ηPQą0

with
Fi,j,η,p :“ tT P P1 pXq : DA P P1 pXq such that xe˚j , Aei y ě η, AT “ T A and xe˚p , Aep y “ 0u.
We first prove the following fact.
Fact 4.12. — For each i, j, p ě 0 and η P Qą0 , the set Fi,j,η,p is SOT˚ -closed in P1 pXq.
                                                                            SOT˚
Proof of Fact 4.12. — Let pTk qkě0 Ď Fi,j,η,p be such that Tk ÝÑ T with T P P1 pXq. For
                                                                          kÑ8
every k ě 0, there exists an operator Ak P P1 pXq such that Ak Tk “ Tk Ak , xe˚j , Ak ei y ě η
and xe˚p , Ak ep y “ 0. Since P1 pXq is WOT-compact (see [9, Page 275, Proposition 5.5]), we
can suppose without loss of generality that there exists an operator A P P1 pXq such that
    WOT
Ak ÝÑ A. We immediately get that xe˚p , Aep y “ 0 and that xe˚j , Aei y ě η. Let us now
    kÑ8
show that AT “ T A.
  Let y ˚ P X ˚ and x P X. We have
               xy ˚ , Ak Tk xy “ xy ˚ , Ak pTk ´ T qxy ` xy ˚ , Ak T xy for every k ě 0.
                                                                   SOT
Since the sequence pAk qkě0 is bounded and since Tk ÝÑ T , we have that
                                                                   kÑ8
                                        xy ˚ , Ak pTk ´ T qxy ÝÑ 0,
                                                              kÑ8
16                                                V. GILLET

                  WOT
and since Ak ÝÑ A, we have that
                  kÑ8

                                        xy ˚ , Ak T xy ÝÑ xy ˚ , AT xy.
                                                     kÑ8

It follows that xy ˚ , Ak Tk xy ÝÑ xy ˚ , AT xy.
                                kÑ8
     Likewise we have
             xy ˚ , Tk Ak xy “ xpTk˚ ´ T ˚ qy ˚ , Ak xy ` xT ˚ y ˚ , Ak xy for every k ě 0,
                                  SOT                      WOT
so using the fact that Tk˚ ÝÑ T ˚ , that Ak ÝÑ A and that the sequence pAk qkě0 is
                                 kÑ8        kÑ8
bounded, we can prove by the same way that xy ˚ , Tk Ak xy ÝÑ xy ˚ , T Axy. It follows that
                                                           kÑ8
                                 ˚            ˚
                                          xy , AT xy “ xy , T Axy
for every y ˚ P X ˚ and x P X and thus AT “ T A. This proves that T P Fi,j,η,p and
concludes the proof of Fact 4.12.
   Let us now prove the following proposition.
Proposition 4.13. — For each i, j, p ě 0 and η P Qą0 , the set Fi,j,η,p has empty interior
in P1 pXq for the SOT˚ topology.
Proof of Proposition 4.13. — Using Lemma 2.2, we will prove that the set P1 pXqzFi,j,η,p
is dense in P1 pXq for the SOT˚ topology.
   Let us fix i, j, p P Z` and η P Qą0 .
   Let N P Z` be such that N ě p and let M P P1 pEN q with kM k ă 1. Let ε ą 0. Let
also u “ e0 ` ... ` ep`N `1 and let us write P : X Ñ EN the canonical projection instead
of PN . By Remark 2.3, we can suppose that xe˚k , M el y ą 0 for every indices 0 ď k, l ď N .
   Let T be the positive operator defined as follows :
                        T x “ M P x ` δ xe˚N `p`1 , xy u ` Sx for every x P X.
In this expression S is the operator on X defined by
         ˜            ¸ N `p`1
           8
           ÿ                 ÿ                       ÿ
                ˚
       S      ek pxqek “         δ e˚k pxq ek`N `1 `                      δk´N ´p´1 e˚k pxq ek`N `1 ,
            k“0                  k“0                          kąN `p`1

where pδk qkě1 is a sequence of positive real numbers satisfying
                            ÿ
                     0ă           δk´N ´p´1 ke˚k kkek`N `1 k ă 1 ´ kM k ,
                             kąN `p`1

where δ ą 0 is such that
                                                   ÿ
                                1 ´ kM k ´                δk´N ´p´1 ke˚k kkek`N `1 k
                                               kąN `p`1
                        0ăδă                              `p`1
                                                         Nÿ
                                                                                       ,
                                    kukke˚N `p`1 k `             ke˚k kkek`N `1 k
                                                           k“0
and where
        δkeN `1`k k ă ε,     δke˚N `1`p k ă ε and δ ă xe˚p , M ep y for every 0 ď k ď N.
     With these choices, we can easily show that T is a positive contraction on X and that
                  kpT ´ M qek k ă ε,       kpT ´ M q˚ e˚k k ă ε for every 0 ď k ď N.
                                TYPICAL ℓp - SPACE CONTRACTIONS                                  17

   It remains to show that T does not belong to Fi,j,η,p . To do so, let A be a positive
operator such that AT “ T A and xe˚p , Aep y “ 0. We will prove that A “ 0. In particular
the condition xe˚j , Aei y ě η won’t be fulfilled and this will yield that T does not belong to
Fi,j,η,p .
  The equation AT ep “ T Aep implies that
(4.2)           AM ep ` δAep`N `1 “ M P Aep ` δ xe˚p`N `1 , Aep y u ` SAep .
We remark that
                                xe˚p`N `1 , SAep y “ δ xe˚p , Aep y “ 0
and that M P Aep P EN , so we also have
                                      xe˚p`N `1 , M P Aep y “ 0.

Applying the functional e˚p`N `1 to the equation (4.2) one gets that

          δ xe˚p`N `1 , Aep y “ xe˚p`N `1 , AM ep y ` δ xe˚p`N `1 , Aep`N `1 y
                                N
                                ÿ
                            “       xe˚k , M ep y xe˚p`N `1 , Aek y ` δ xe˚p`N `1 , Aep`N `1 y
                                k“0

and so
                                                        ÿ
(4.3)        pδ ´ xe˚p , M ep yq xe˚p`N `1 , Aep y “           xe˚k , M ep y xe˚p`N `1 , Aek y
                                                       0ďkďN
                                                        k‰p
                                                               ` δ xe˚p`N `1 , Aep`N `1 y.

Using the non-negativity of the coefficients on the right hand side of (4.3), and using the
fact that δ ă xe˚p , M ep y and that xe˚p`N `1 , Aep y ě 0, it follows that

(4.4)      xe˚p`N `1 , Aep`N `1 y “ 0 and xe˚p`N `1 , Aek y “ 0 for every 0 ď k ď N.
Thus one gets
(4.5)                   AT ek “ AM ek ` δAek`N `1              for every 0 ď k ď N,
(4.6)            and T Aek “ M P Aek ` SAek              for every 0 ď k ď N.
The relations T Aek “ AT ek for 0 ď k ď N imply that
                     $
                     ’
                     ’ M P Ae0 ` SAe0      “ AM e0 ` δAeN `1
                     & M P Ae1 ` SAe1
                     ’
                                           “ AM e1 ` δAeN `2
(4.7)                                      ..
                     ’
                     ’
                     ’                      .
                     % M P Ae ` SAe        “  AM eN ` δAe2N `1
                               N       N

and since P SAel “ 0 for every 0 ď l ď N , we obtain that
                       $
                       ’
                       ’   M P Ae0 “ P AM e0 ` δP AeN `1
                       & M P Ae1 “ P AM e1 ` δP AeN `2
                       ’
(4.8)                                 ..
                       ’
                       ’
                       ’               .
                       % M P Ae
                                 N   “   P AM eN ` δP Ae2N `1 .
18                                           V. GILLET

Finally rewriting the system (4.8) we obtain the following system :
              $
                 ÿN                       N
                                          ÿ
                      ˚
                                             xe˚k , M e0 yP Aek ` δP AeN `1
              ’
                    xe  , P Ae  yM e  “
              ’
                      k       0     k
              ’
              ’
              ’
              ’
              ’
              ’  k“0                     k“0
              ’
              ’  ÿN                       N
                                          ÿ
                      ˚
                                             xe˚k , M e1 yP Aek ` δP AeN `2
              ’
                    xek , P Ae1 yM ek “
              ’
              &
(4.9)            k“0                     k“0
              ’
              ’                       ..
                                       .
              ’
              ’
              ’
              ’
              ’
              ’  ÿN                       N
                                          ÿ
                      ˚
                                             xe˚k , M eN yP Aek ` δP Ae2N `1 .
              ’
                    xek , P AeN yM ek “
              ’
              ’
              ’
              %
                  k“0                          k“0
     The system (4.9) is equivalent to the following matrix equation

(4.10)                                   BC “ CB ` δD,
where
                        xe˚0 , P Ae0 y      xe˚1 , P Ae0 y             xe˚N , P Ae0 y
                           ¨                                                          ˛
                                                              ¨¨¨
                      ˚ xe˚ , P Ae1 y
                      ˚ 0                   xe˚1 , P Ae1 y    ¨¨¨      xe˚N , P Ae1 y ‹
                    B“˚         ..                  ..                        ..      ‹,
                                                                                      ‹
                                                              ..
                      ˝          .                   .           .             .      ‚
                          xe˚0 , P AeN y xe˚1 , P AeN y ¨ ¨ ¨ xe˚N , P AeN y
                            xe0 , M e0 y xe˚1 , M e0 y ¨ ¨ ¨ xe˚N , M e0 y
                          ¨ ˚                                              ˛
                          ˚ xe˚ , M e1 y xe˚ , M e1 y ¨ ¨ ¨ xe˚ , M e1 y ‹
                          ˚ 0                1                  N
                        C“˚        ..            ..                  ..    ‹,
                                                                           ‹
                                                        . .
                          ˝         .             .         .         .    ‚
                                ˚            ˚                 ˚
                            xe0 , M eN y xe1 , M eN y ¨ ¨ ¨ xeN , M eN y
and
                   xe˚0 , P AeN `1 y      xe˚1 , P AeN `1 y              xe˚N , P AeN `1 y
                    ¨                                                                      ˛
                                                                ¨¨¨
                 ˚ xe˚ , P AeN `2 y
                 ˚ 0                      xe˚1 , P AeN `2 y     ¨¨¨      xe˚N , P AeN `2 y ‹
               D“˚          ..                     ..                             ..       ‹.
                                                                                           ‹
                                                                ..
                 ˝           .                      .              .               .       ‚
                     xe˚0 , P Ae2N `1 y xe˚1 , P Ae2N `1 y ¨ ¨ ¨ xe˚N , P Ae2N `1 y
We will now show that D “ 0 using a similar idea to [5, Theorem 2.1].
   Since C is a matrix with positive entries, the spectral radius of C and C J is a positive
eigenvalue of C and C J respectively associated to eigenvectors with positive entries. Let
λ be the spectral radius of C and C J . Then there exist two vectors x, y P RN `1 with
positive entries such that
                                   Cx “ λx and y J C “ λy J .
The equation (4.10) implies that
                                        λBx “ CBx ` δDx
and
                                   λy J Bx “ λy J Bx ` δy J Dx,
so that
                                       y J Dx “ 0.
Using the fact that the vectors x and y have positive entries, it follows that D “ 0.
  Now because the vectors P Ael belong to EN , we just have proved that
(4.11)                     P Aek “ 0 for every N ` 1 ď k ď 2N ` 1.
                                  TYPICAL ℓp - SPACE CONTRACTIONS                           19

  Using the last equation (4.11), the relation AT ep`N `1 “ T Aep`N `1 gives

                                   δAu ` δAep`2N `2 “ SAep`N `1 ,
so using the fact that
                            xe˚k , SAep`N `1 y “ 0 for every 0 ď k ď N,
we get that
(4.12)                       δP Au ` δP Aep`2N `2 “ P SAep`N `1 “ 0.
Now recall that u “ e0 ` ... ` ep`N `1 . It follows from the non-negativity of the coefficients
in the equation (4.12) that
(4.13)                         P Aek “ 0 for every 0 ď k ď 2N ` 1.
  Let
             ak,l “ xe˚k , Ael y and mk,l “ xe˚k , M el y for every k, l ě 0.
  From the equations (4.4) and (4.13), we have :
(4.14)            ak,l “ 0 for every 0 ď k ď N and every 0 ď l ď 2N ` 1,
(4.15)            ap`N `1,l “ 0 for every 0 ď l ď N,
(4.16)            ap`N `1,p`N `1 “ 0.
  An easy computation shows that
                                          N
                                          ÿ
                       xe˚k , AT e0 y “         ak,l ml,0 ` δak,N `1     for every k ě 0
                                          l“0
and that
                          $
                          & δ ak´N ´1,0 ` δ aN `p`1,0 if N ` 1 ď k ď N ` p ` 1,
         xe˚k , T Ae0 y “   δ ak´N ´1,0               if N ` p ` 1 ă k ď 2N ` p ` 2,
                            δk´2N ´p´2 ak´N ´1,0      if k ą 2N ` p ` 2.
                          %

So using the equation
                                          xe˚k , AT e0 y “ xe˚k , T Ae0 y ,
one gets that
                N
                ÿ
                      ak,l ml,0 ` δ ak,N `1 “ 0 for every N ` 1 ď k ď N ` p ` 1,
                l“0
and using the non-negativity of the coefficients and the fact that the coefficients ml,0 are
positive we obtain that
(4.17)          ak,l “ 0 for every 0 ď l ď N ` 1 and every N ` 1 ď k ď N ` p ` 1.
Proceeding by induction we easily get that
(4.18)                  ak,l “ 0 for every 0 ď l ď N ` 1 and every k ě 0,
so in particular we have
(4.19)                            Ael “ 0 for every 0 ď l ď N ` 1.
Now because we have
(4.20)                           T Ael “ 0 for every 0 ď l ď N ` 1
20                                            V. GILLET

and
(4.21)             AT el “ AM P el ` δAel`N `1           for every 0 ď l ď N ` 1,
the equation (4.20) and the positivity of the vectors in the relation (4.21) gives us
(4.22)                      Ael`N `1 “ 0 for every 0 ď l ď N ` 1.
     If we put together the equations (4.19) and (4.22), we obtain that
                               Ael “ 0 for every 0 ď l ď 2N ` 2.
     Proceeding by induction we easily obtain that Aek “ 0 for every k ě 0 and thus A “ 0.
     This concludes the proof of Proposition 4.13.
     The proof of Theorem 4.11 immediately follows from Fact 4.12 and Proposition 4.13.
   Finally we extend Corollary 4.9 to Banach spaces with a basis. Observe that we do not
require here that the basis be monotone, and hence Theorem 4.11 does not apply.
Proposition 4.14. — Let X be a Banach space with a basis pen qně0 . A typical T P
pP1 pXq, SOTq (resp. T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q when X ˚ is separable) is not quasinilpotent at any
non-zero positive vector of X.
Proof. — Consider the following set
         A :“ tT P P1 pXq : D y P X, y ě 0, y ‰ 0 such that T is quasinilpotent at yu.
By Lemma 4.10 we have                             ď
                                            AĎ          Fj ,
                                                  jě0
with
                    Fj :“ tT P P1 pXq : xe˚j , T ej y “ 0u for every j ě 0.
Each Fj is SOT-closed in P1 pXq and hence SOT˚ -closed in P1 pXq. Let us now prove that
each Fj has empty interior in pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q.
  To do so, let ε ą 0, let T P P1 pXq with kT k ă 1 and let x1 , ..., xn P X and y1˚ , ..., yn˚ P X ˚ .
We have to find a positive operator S in the set P1 pXqzFj such that
(4.23)                    max maxtkpT ´ Sq xl k, kpT ´ Sq˚ yl˚ ku ă ε.
                          1ďlďn

Consider the positive operator Sδ defined by Sδ pxq “ T x ` δ xe˚j , xy ej for every x P X,
where δ is a positive number that we will define later on. We have that
                                        xe˚j , Sδ ej y ě δ ą 0.
For every x P X, we have that
                                  kSδ xk ď pkT k ` δke˚j kkej kqkxk
and for every 1 ď l ď n, we have that
           kpT ´ Sδ q xl k ď δkxl kke˚j kkej k and      kpT ´ Sδ q˚ yl˚ k ď δkyl˚ kke˚j kkej k.
If we choose δ ą 0 such that
        1 ´ kT k
   δă ˚            , δkxl kke˚j kkej k ă ε and δkyl˚ kke˚j kkej k ă ε for every 1 ď l ď n,
        kej kkej k
then the operator Sδ is a positive contraction of P1 pXqzFj satisfying (4.23). This proves
that each P1 pXqzFj is SOT˚ -dense in P1 pXq and this concludes the proof of Proposition
4.14.
                                TYPICAL ℓp - SPACE CONTRACTIONS                                    21

                            5. Further remarks and questions
    We end this article with some comments and open questions in relation to our previous
results.
    The first natural open question is of course the following.
Question 5.1. — If X “ ℓq with 1 ă q ‰ 2 ă 8, does a typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq or
T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q have a non-trivial invariant subspace?
    By [11, Corollary 5.3], the point spectrum of a typical contraction T P pB1 pℓ2 q, SOTq
is the open unit disk D. This comes from the fact that an SOT-typical contraction on ℓ2
is unitarily equivalent to the infinite-dimensional backward unilateral shift operator on
ℓ2 pZ` ˆ Z` q. The proof uses first the fact that a typical contraction on ℓ2 is a co-isometry
for the SOT topology. Since this is no longer the case for an SOT-typical positive contraction
on ℓ2 by Proposition 3.7, the proof given in [11] does not work for positive contractions.
So the following question is still open.
Question 5.2. — Is it still true that the point spectrum of an SOT-typical positive con-
traction on ℓ2 is D?
    The third question is motivated by Proposition 3.2.
Question 5.3. — If X “ ℓq with 1 ă q ă 2, is it true that a typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq is
such that p2T q˚ is hypercyclic?
    Lemma 2.2 requires X to have a monotone basis in order to be able to say that if T0 is
a positive operator on X such that kT0 k ă 1, then kPN T0 PN k ă 1 for every N ě 0. This
lemma was useful to prove Theorem 4.11. We thus have the following open question.
Question 5.4. — Can Lemma 2.2 be generalized to Banach spaces admitting a basis
which is not necessarily monotone?
    Theorem 4.11 applies to the SOT˚ topology. Indeed the proof of Fact 4.12 uses the
SOT˚ topology to prove that each set Fi,j,η,p is closed is P1 pXq. Since these sets are not
necessarily SOT-closed, the following question is natural.
Question 5.5. — Is the analogue of Theorem 4.11 still true for the SOT topology?
    It is proved in [14, Theorem 7.5] that a typical contraction T P pB1 pℓ2 q, SOT˚ q does
not commute with any non-zero compact operator on ℓ2 . Since the proof uses unitary
equivalence of operators, it does not extend to positive contractions. Thus the following
question is open.
Question 5.6. — Does a typical T P pP1 pXq, SOT˚ q commute with a non-zero compact
operator if X “ ℓ2 ? And what about a typical T P pP1 pXq, SOTq?
    Finally we have the following question. A positive answer to it would enlighten the
situation very much.
Question 5.7. — If X “ ℓq with 1 ă q ď 2, are the SOT and the SOT˚ topologies similar
on P1 pXq?
  Acknowledgments. I would like to thank Sophie Grivaux for helpful discussions and
suggestions.


                                           References
 [1] Y. A. Abramovich, C. D. Aliprantis, and O. Burkinshaw, Invariant Subspaces for Positive Operators
     Acting on a Banach Space with Basis, Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society 123 (1995),
     no. 6, 1773-1777. Ò2, 13
22                                             V. GILLET

 [2] Y. A. Abramovich, C. D. Aliprantis, and O. Burkinshaw, Invariant Subspaces of operators on ℓp -spaces,
     Journal of Functional Analysis 115 (1993), 418-424. Ò4, 13
 [3] C. Ambrozie and V. Müller, Invariant subspaces for polynomially bounded operators, J. Funct. Anal.
     213 (2004), no. 2, 321–345. Ò13
 [4] F. Bayart and É. Matheron, Dynamics of linear operators, Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics, vol. 179,
     Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2009. Ò9, 10
 [5] J. Bračič, R. Drnovšek, Y. B. Farforovskaya, E. L. Rabkin, and J. Zemánek, On positive commutators,
     Positivity 14 (2010), 431–439. Ò18
 [6] S. W. Brown, B. Chevreau, and C. Pearcy, On the structure of contraction operators. II, J. Funct.
     Anal. 76 (1988), no. 1, 30–55. Ò2, 12
 [7] I. Chalendar and J. Esterle, Le problème du sous-espace invariant, Development of mathematics 1950–
     2000, Birkhäuser, Basel, 2000, pp. 235–267. Ò3
 [8] I. Chalendar and J. R. Partington, Modern approaches to the invariant-subspace problem, Cambridge
     Tracts in Mathematics, vol. 188, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2011. Ò3
 [9] J. B. Conway, A course in functional analysis, second edition, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 96,
     Springer-Verlag, New York, 2007. Ò5, 15
[10] T. Eisner, A “typical” contraction is unitary, Enseign. Math. (2) 56 (2010), no. 3-4, 403–410. Ò2
[11] T. Eisner and T. Mátrai, On typical properties of Hilbert space operators, Israel J. Math. 195 (2013),
     no. 1, 247–281. Ò2, 4, 10, 21
[12] P. Enﬂo, On the invariant subspace problem for Banach spaces, Acta Math. 158 (1987), no. 3-4,
     213–313. Ò2
[13] S. Grivaux, É. Matheron, and Q. Menet, Linear dynamical systems on Hilbert spaces: typical properties
     and explicit examples, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 269 (2021), no. 1315, v+147. Ò2, 10
[14] S. Grivaux, É. Matheron, and Q. Menet, Does a typical ℓp -space contraction have a non-trivial in-
     variant subspace?, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 374 (2021), no. 10, 7359–7410. Ò2, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
     21
[15] S. Grivaux, É. Matheron, and Q. Menet, Generic properties of ℓp -contractions and similar operator
     topologies, preprint available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.07938 (2022). Ò2, 8, 9, 11, 12
[16] K.-G. Grosse-Erdmann and A. Peris Manguillot, Linear chaos, Universitext, Springer, London, 2011.
     Ò9
[17] A. S. Kechris, Classical descriptive set theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 156, Springer-
     Verlag, New York, 1995. MR1321597 Ò8
[18] J. Lindenstrauss and L. Tzafriri, Classical Banach spaces. I, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1977.
     Sequence spaces; Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete, Vol. 92. Ò7
[19] V. I. Lomonosov, Invariant subspaces of the family of operators that commute with a completely con-
     tinuous operator, Funkcional. Anal. i Priložen. 7 (1973), no. 3, 55–56 (Russian). Ò2
[20] V. Müller, Spectral Theory of Linear Operators, 2nd ed., Operator Theory: Advances and Applications,
     vol. 139, Birkhäuser Basel, 2007. Ò11
[21] H. Radjavi and P. Rosenthal, Invariant subspaces, 2nd ed., Dover Publications, Inc., Mineola, NY,
     2003. Ò3
[22] H. Radjavi and V. Troitsky, Invariant sublattices, Ilinois J. Math. 52 (2008), no. 2, 437–462. Ò4, 13
[23] C. J. Read, A solution to the invariant subspace problem on the space l1 , Bull. London Math. Soc. 17
     (1985), no. 4, 305–317. Ò2
[24] C. J. Read, The invariant subspace problem on some Banach spaces with separable dual, Proc. London
     Math. Soc. (3) 58 (1989), no. 3, 583–607. Ò2
[25] V. Troitsky, On the modulus of C. J. Read’s Operator, Positivity 2 (1998), 257–264. Ò2



V. Gillet, Laboratoire Paul Painlevé, UMR 8524, Université de Lille, Cité Scientiﬁque, Bâtiment M2,
    59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq Cedex (France) ‚ E-mail : valentin.gillet@univ-lille.fr
