                                           A GLOBAL PROOF OF THE HOMOLOGICAL EXCESS INTERSECTION
                                                                  FORMULA

                                                                                    OSCAR FINEGAN




arXiv:2406.17485v1 [math.AG] 25 Jun 2024
                                                  Abstract. We provide a novel proof of the homological excess intersection formula for
                                                  local complete intersections. The novelty is that the proof makes use of global morphisms
                                                  comparing the intersections to a self intersection.

                                                                                   1. Introduction
                                               The purpose of this short paper is to provide a novel proof of an existing result which can
                                           be found in [Sca15], namely, the homological excess intersection formula for local complete
                                           intersections:
                                           Theorem 1.1. Let X be a nonsingular variety over an algebraically closed field k of char-
                                           acteristic 0. Let Y1 , . . . , Yn be local complete intersection subvarieties such that their inter-
                                           section W is a local complete intersection in X. Then
                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                           ∼
                                                                                                             ^
                                                                                    OX
                                                                                T orq (OY1 , . . . , OYn ) =   EW
                                                            L                           
                                           where EW = Ker         (NY∨i /X )|W → NW/X  ∨
                                                                                             is the excess bundle on W , which is of rank equal
                                                                            Pn
                                           to the excess codimension ( i=1 codim(Yi , X)) − codim(W, X).
                                               We are ultimately interested in extending this result to the case where the intersection of
                                           the Yi is no longer a local complete intersection. The strategy of the original proof is roughly
                                           to construct local isomorphisms using algebraic computations with Koszul complexes, and
                                           then to prove that the local isomorphisms glue up to a global one. When the intersection
                                           of the Yi is not itself lci, one runs into difficulties with computing Koszul cohomologies as
                                           well as with the gluing argument. In this work, we give a global morphism from the derived
                                           intersection of the Yi in X to the derived self-intersection of the product of the Yi inside the
                                           n-fold product of X. Here, by derived intersection we mean the object OY1 ⊗L · · · ⊗L OYn ∈
                                           D(X) etc.. The morphism is the unit for the pullback-pushforward adjunction of the closed
                                           immersion of the intersection in X. This morphism fits the multitors into a long exact
                                           sequence in which we have an explicit description for each third term with no assumptions
                                           on the intersection at all. In the situation of Theorem 1.1, this long exact sequence simplifies
                                           enough to prove the result.
                                           Notation. In this paper, k will be an algebraically closed field of characteristic 0.
                                                                                   2. Preliminaries
                                           2.1. Koszul complexes and local complete intersections. Much of the material in this
