                     STABLY EXOTIC FILLINGS OF 3-MANIFOLDS


           DANIEL KASPROWSKI, PATRICK ORSON, MARK POWELL, AND ARUNIMA RAY


        Abstract. We investigate which 3-manifolds bound 4-manifolds that are homeomorphic but
        not stably diffeomorphic, where stabilising means taking connected sum with copies of S 2 × S 2 .
        We show that every closed, orientable 3-manifold admits such fillings, as do certain families of
        nonorientable 3-manifolds. In contrast we show that for a 3-manifold containing a 2-sided RP2 ,
        any two smooth, homeomorphic fillings are stably diffeomorphic.




                                             1. Introduction
  A filling of a closed, smooth 3-manifold Y is a smooth, compact 4-manifold M with ∂M = Y .
We prove the following.
Theorem 1.1. Let Y be a closed, smooth 3-manifold. Then Y admits a pair of fillings that are
homeomorphic rel. boundary but not stably diffeomorphic rel. boundary if one of the following holds.
  (i) Y is orientable.
 (ii) Y is a circle bundle over a closed surface F ̸= RP2 .
(iii) Y admits a null-bordant tangential Pin+ structure.
   Here two fillings M and M ′ of Y are stably diffeomorphic rel. boundary if there exists k ≥ 0 such
that M #k(S 2 × S 2 ) and M ′ #k(S 2 × S 2 ) are diffeomorphic via a diffeomorphism restricting to the
identity on the boundary. Stable homeomorphism, which is used later, is defined analogously. Note
that the fillings in Theorem 1.1 are in particular exotic fillings. By a theorem of Gompf [Gom84],
homeomorphism implies stable diffeomorphism for compact, orientable 4-manifolds, so the fillings
we produce in Theorem 1.1 are necessarily nonorientable.
   Every orientable 3-manifold admits a null-bordant tangential Pin+ structure, so Theorem 1.1 (i)
is implied by Theorem 1.1 (iii). We state (i) separately for emphasis, and because we give the
proof for this case separately, in Section 3.
   Our examples will be of the form
                                M = Z#K3 and M ′ = Z#11(S 2 × S 2 ),
for a suitable nonorientable filling Z of Y , where K3 denotes the Kummer surface. The first
examples of this sort, for closed 4-manifolds, are due to Kreck [Kre84]. Using that K3 splits
topologically as E8 #E8 #3(S 2 × S 2 ), we will show in Lemma 3.1 that M is homeomorphic to M ′ .
But by Rochlin’s theorem, there is no such smooth splitting of K3 . This is used in the proof of
Theorem 1.1, for Y satisfying (i), (ii), or (iii), and well-chosen fillings Z, to show that the union
                                                                                 Top
M ∪Y M ′ is nontrivial when considered in the kernel ker(Ω4 (ξG ) → Ω4 (ξG           )) of the forgetful
map between smooth and topological bordism groups over certain fibrations, defined in Section 2
and dependent on G = π1 (Z). Using a result of Kreck [Kre99, Corollary 3] (see Theorem 2.4 for
details), we show how unions in this kernel give rise to the eponymous stably exotic fillings of Y ,
namely fillings that are stably homeomorphic but not stably diffeomorphic, both rel. boundary.
Working stably is thus the most natural setting in which to isolate this type of exotic behaviour,
arising from Rochlin’s theorem, since it factors out the effect of gauge theory.
   The above strategy does not always produce stably exotic fillings, and indeed not all 3-manifolds
admit them.
Theorem 1.2. Let Y be a closed, smooth 3-manifold that contains a two-sided RP2 . Then Y does
not admit stably exotic fillings.

  2020 Mathematics Subject Classification. 57K40.
  Key words and phrases. 4-manifolds, exotic fillings.
                                                         1

2             DANIEL KASPROWSKI, PATRICK ORSON, MARK POWELL, AND ARUNIMA RAY


    Theorems 1.1 and 1.2 partially answer the following question, which remains open in general.
Question 1.3. Which closed, smooth 3-manifolds admit stably exotic fillings?
   For example, we do not know whether the 3-manifold constructed in Example 6.8, a T 2 -bundle
over S 1 , admits stably exotic fillings.
   We also remark that it is open which 3-manifolds admit exotic fillings, i.e. fillings that are home-
omorphic rel. boundary but not diffeomorphic rel. boundary; cf. [EMM22; BKR26, Problem 4.6].
Another related open question asks which orientable 3-manifolds admit exotic orientable fillings.

Proof strategy. We now elaborate further on the proofs of Theorems 1.1 and 1.2. For the ar-
                                                                                                 Top
gument outlined on the previous page to work, at a minimum the kernel of Ω4 (ξG ) → Ω4 (ξG           )
must have a nontrivial element. Given any group G, together with a choice of abstract normal
1-type data (see Section 2), we can hope to characterise precisely when this kernel is nontrivial, by
considering differentials in the James spectral sequence computing Ω4 (ξG ), as in [KP25]. Nontriv-
iality of the kernel turns out to be equivalent to [K3 ] ̸= 0 in Ω4 (ξG ). Given a 3-manifold Y , we
can then seek to find, as we will do in the proof of Theorem 1.1, a suitable group G with normal
1-type data compatible with Y , and a suitable nonorientable filling Z with π1 (Z) = G, to realise
the nontrivial element of the kernel by the manifold M ∪Y M ′ described above. This will prove we
have constructed stably exotic fillings. In contrast, in the proof of Theorem 1.2, we show that in
the presence of RP2 × I ⊆ Y , for any possible ξG we will have [K3 ] = 0 ∈ Ω4 (ξG ). See Section 2 for
                                Top
more information on ξG and ξG       , and Section 4 for our compatibility condition for normal 1-type
data with Y .

The cardinality of stably exotic fillings. To supplement the results above, within a fixed
(stable) homeomorphism class of fillings, we show in Proposition 8.1 that there are at most two
stable diffeomorphism classes rel. boundary. So it is not possible to find any larger classes of stably
exotic fillings than we find in Theorem 1.1. On the other hand, in Proposition 8.3 we show that
modifying any given stably exotic pair by connected summing both with copies of S 1 × S 3 , one
can obtain infinitely many stable homeomorphism classes of pairs of stably exotic fillings for any
fixed Y that admits them, distinguished by their fundamental groups.

Examples. Now we give some examples designed to illustrate the use of condition (iii) in Theo-
rem 1.1 and to compare the three conditions of Theorem 1.1. As mentioned earlier, Theorem 1.1 (iii)
implies Theorem 1.1 (i). There is some overlap between (i) and (ii): for example, (i) implies (ii)
when F = S 2 . But in general both set differences between conditions (i) and (ii) are nonempty.
Since Theorem 1.1 (ii) does not imply Theorem 1.1 (i) while Theorem 1.1 (iii) does imply Theo-
rem 1.1 (i), one sees that Theorem 1.1 (ii) does not imply Theorem 1.1 (iii).
   Condition (iii) in Theorem 1.1 may seem difficult to check at first glance, in which case the
following observations, which we use in the proofs of the upcoming examples, may help. First,
Y admits a tangential Pin+ structure if and only if the orientation character w1Y : π1 (Y ) → Z/2
factors through Z/4 (Proposition 5.9). Second, a Pin+ 3-manifold is null-bordant if and only if the
spin surface dual to the orientation character is spin null-bordant (Proposition 5.10).
   In the following example, we describe a family of Pin+ nonorientable 3-manifolds admitting sta-
bly exotic fillings, by applying Theorem 1.1 (iii). This demonstrates that there exist nonorientable
3-manifolds admitting a null-bordant tangential Pin+ structure, so Theorem 1.1 (i) does not imply
Theorem 1.1 (iii).
Example 1.4. Let F be a closed, orientable surface and let F → Y → S 1 be a fibre bundle
with orientation-reversing monodromy φ : F → F . Note that Y is nonorientable by construction.
                                               ∗
Suppose that the fixed subgroup H 1 (F ; Z/2)φ is at least half-rank in H 1 (F ; Z/2). We show in
Proposition 6.6 that Y admits a null-bordant Pin+ structure, and hence admits stably exotic fillings
by Theorem 1.1 (iii). We show in Example 6.8 that the statement is false in general without the
                                 ∗
rank assumption on H 1 (F ; Z/2)φ .
   Next we give an example of a circle bundle over a surface (̸= RP2 ) which does not admit a
tangential Pin+ structure. This shows that Theorem 1.1 (iii) does not imply Theorem 1.1 (ii).

                              STABLY EXOTIC FILLINGS OF 3-MANIFOLDS                                    3


Example 1.5. Let F = #3 RP2 be the closed surface of nonorientable genus three and Y := S 1 ×F .
In Proposition 6.9 we show that the orientation character w1Y : π1 (Y ) → Z/2 does not factor
through Z/4. By Proposition 5.9, this shows that Y does not admit a tangential Pin+ structure.
   We have therefore shown that the only logical dependency between the items of Theorem 1.1 is
the aforementioned fact that Theorem 1.1 (iii) implies Theorem 1.1 (i).
Organisation. In Section 2 we introduce the key concept of normal 1-type data and explain the
