ISSN 1472-2739 (on-line) 1472-2747 (printed)                                         1719


Algebraic & Geometric Topology
Volume 5 (2005) 1719–1732
Published: 17 December 2005                                                 ATG
           Surgery and involutions on 4-manifolds
                           Vyacheslav S. Krushkal

     Abstract We prove that the canonical 4-dimensional surgery problems
     can be solved after passing to a double cover. This contrasts the long-
     standing conjecture about the validity of the topological surgery theorem for
     arbitrary fundamental groups (without passing to a cover). As a corollary,
     the surgery conjecture is reformulated in terms of the existence of free
     involutions on a certain class of 4-manifolds. We consider this question
     and analyze its relation to the A, B -slice problem.
     AMS Classification 57N13; 57M10, 57M60
     Keywords 4-manifolds, surgery, involutions


1    Introduction

The geometric classification techniques — surgery and the s-cobordism theorem
— are known to hold in the topological category in dimension 4 for a class of
fundamental groups which includes the groups of subexponential growth [2], [7],
[10], and are conjectured to fail in general [3]. The unrestricted surgery theorem
is known to be equivalent to the existence of a certain family of canonical 4-
manifolds with free fundamental group. Recall the precise conjecture concerning
these canonical surgery problems [3]:

Conjecture 1.1 The untwisted Whitehead double of the Borromean Rings,
Wh(Bor), is not a freely topologically slice link.

In this statement the additional “free” requirement is that the complement of
the slices in the 4-ball has free fundamental group generated by the meridians
to the link components. (The slicing problem is open without this extra con-
dition as well.) Considering the slice complement, the conjecture is seen to be
equivalent to the statement that there does not exist a topological 4-manifold
M , homotopy equivalent to ∨3 S 1 , and whose boundary is homeomorphic to
the zero-framed surgery on the Whitehead double of the Borromean rings:
∂M ∼ = S 0 (Wh(Bor)). In contrast, here we show that there exists a double
cover of this hypothetical manifold M :


c Geometry & Topology Publications

1720                                                       Vyacheslav S. Krushkal


Theorem 1.2 There exists a smooth 4-manifold N homotopy equivalent to
a double cover of ∨3 S 1 with ∂N homeomorphic to the corresponding double
cover of S 0 (Wh(Bor)). The analagous double covers exist for all generalized
Borromean rings.

Here the generalized Borromean rings are a family of links obtained from the
Hopf link by iterated ramified Bing doubling. The Borromean rings are the
simplest representative of this class of links, and the slicing problem for the
Whitehead doubles of such links provides a set of canonical surgery problems.
It is interesting to note that the double covers of the (hypothetical) canonical
4-manifolds, constructed in theorem 1.2, are smooth. The surgery conjecture is
known to fail in the smooth category even in the simply-connected case [1], thus
there does not exist a smooth free involution on N — corresponding to at least
one of the generalized Borromean rings — extending the obvious involution
on the boundary ∂N . In the topological category we have the following new
reformulation of the surgery conjecture.

Corollary 1.3 Suppose the topological 4-dimensional surgery and 5-dimen-
sional s-cobordism conjectures hold for free groups. Then there exists a free
involution on each manifold N constructed in theorem 1.2, extending the given
involution on the boundary. Conversely, suppose such involutions exist. Then
the surgery conjecture holds for all fundamental groups.

To have a statement equivalent just to surgery (independent of the s-cobordism
conjecture), one needs to consider involutions on the class of all 4-manifolds
with the given boundary and homotopy equivalent to those constructed in the-
orem 1.2. To prove the corollary, note that if a required involution existed
then the quotients provide solutions to the canonical surgery problems. Con-
versely, the validity of the surgery conjecture implies that a surgery kernel (a
direct sum of hyperbolic pairs ( 01 10 ) in π2 M ) can be represented by embedded
spheres is a 4-manifold s-cobordant to M , see [6, 12.3]. The proof of theorem
1.2 (see section 2) involves a construction of a specific manifold MBor surgery
on which would give a canonical manifold as above. Therefore if the surgery
conjecture were true there exists a manifold M ′ s-cobordant to MBor where
the surgery kernel is represented by embedded spheres. Surger them out and
consider its double cover N ′ . If the s-cobordism conjecture holds then N ′ is
homeomorphic to the manifold N constructed in theorem 1.2, so N admits a
free involution.
The proof of theorem 1.2 is given in section 2. Another set of canonical prob-
lems is provided by capped gropes (they are canonical in the sense that finding


Algebraic & Geometric Topology, Volume 5 (2005)

Surgery and involutions on 4-manifolds                                           1721


an embedded disk in capped gropes is equivalent to both the surgery and the
s-cobordism theorems.) Section 2 also contains a proof analogous to theorem
1.2 in this context. In section 3 we start analyzing the approach to the surgery
conjecture provided by the corollary 1.3 above. Its relation to the A, B -slice
problem is illustrated by showing that an involution cannot have a fundamental
domain bounded by certain homologically simple 3-manifolds. The complexity
of this problem is in the interplay between the topology of ∂N and the homo-
topy type of N — we point out how the analogous question is settled when N
is closed or has a “simpler” boundary.

Acknowledgements I would like to thank Michael Freedman and Frank
Quinn for discussions on the subject. I also thank the referee for the com-
ments on the exposition of the paper.
This research was partially supported by the NSF and by the Institute for
Advanced Study.


2    Double cover of the canonical problems

In this section we prove Theorem 1.2. The proof consists of an explicit construc-
tion of a 4-manifold with the prescribed boundary, and an observation that the
surgery kernel in a double cover is represented by embedded spheres. Surgering
them out gives a 4-manifold with the required homotopy type. We also present
an argument for a different set of canonical disk embedding problems: capped
gropes.
Proof of Theorem 1.2 Given a link L = (l1 , . . . , ln ) in S 3 , let L′ =
(l1′ , . . . , ln′ ) denote its parallel copy, where the components are pushed off with
trivial linking numbers. Consider the 4-manifold ML obtained by attaching
zero framed 2-handles to B 4 along the (2n)-component link L ∪ L′ , and in-
troducing a plumbing between the handles attached to li and li′ , for each i.
The fundamental group of ML is the free group Fn , freely generated by n
loops, each passing exactly once through a plumbing point. Suppose all linking
numbers of L vanish, then the intersection form on π2 (ML ) is a direct sum of
hyperbolic planes ( 01 10 ).
The boundary of ML is diffeomorphic to the zero-framed surgery on S 3 along
the untwisted Whitehead double of L, cf [4], [7]. For convenience of the reader
and since the manifold ML (where L = the Borromean rings) plays an im-
portant role in the proof of theorem 1.2, we provide a proof based on Kirby
calculus [7].


Algebraic & Geometric Topology, Volume 5 (2005)

1722                                                        Vyacheslav S. Krushkal


Lemma 2.1 ∂ML ∼     = S 0 (Wh(L)), with the isomorphism carrying the meridi-
ans of the 1-handles to the meridians to Wh(L).

There is a ± ambiguity for the clasp of each component (the sign of the White-
head doubling corresponds to the sign of the plumbing), and since it is irrevele-
vant for our discussion, we consider any choice of the sign for each component,
so Wh(L) denotes any of the 2n resulting links. Recall a well-known fact in
Kirby calculus:

Proposition 2.2 The effect of introducing a ± plumbing on the underlying
Kirby handle diagram of a handlebody is to introduce a new 1-handle and a ±
clasp of the attaching curves of the 2-handles being plumbed over the 1-handle
(Figure 1).




                 Figure 1: Kirby diagram of a (positive) plumbing


Proof of lemma 2.1 This is a calculation in Kirby calculus in a solid torus,
see Figure 2. The solid torus is the complement of the dotted circle in S 3 .
Figure 2 displays the positive clasp, of course the negative case is treated anal-
ogously. The first and third arrows are isotopies of R3 . The second arrow
involves replacing a zero-framed 2-handle with a 1-handle (a diffeomorphism
of the boundary) and then cancelling a 1- and 2-handle pair. Similarly, the
last arrow is a diffeomorphism of the boundary of the 4-manifold.

The construction of ML is used in [7] to show that the untwisted Whitehead
doubles of a certain subclass of homotopically trivial links are slice. This is
done by representing a hyperbolic basis of π2 (ML ) by π1 -null transverse pairs
of spheres, which by [6, Chapter 6] are s-cobordant to embedded pairs. We
show that for the generalized Borromean Rings, one can find smoothly embedded
transverse pairs in a double cover. (Of course these links are homotopically
essential and this is the central open case in the surgery conjecture.)


Algebraic & Geometric Topology, Volume 5 (2005)

Surgery and involutions on 4-manifolds                                            1723




                 0




                             Figure 2: Proof of lemma 2.1


Consider the Borromean Rings Bor = (l1 , l2 , l3 ), and the corresponding man-
ifold MBor , introduced above. Let p : M      fBor −→ MBor be the double cover
induced by the homomorphism π1 (MBor ) −→ Z/2, which sends each preferred
free generator to the non-trivial element. More specifically, the 4−ball and the
2−handles of MBor each have two lifts in the double cover. Denote the two
                    4
4−balls by B 4 , B , and consider the lifts Bor, Bor of the Borromean rings
                                                     ′     4
and their parallel copies: li , li′ in ∂B 4 ; li , l i in B , i = 1, 2, 3, see Figure 3.
The cover MfBor is obtained from
                                                4
             (B 4 ∪Bor,Bor′ 2 − handles) ∐ (B ∪Bor,Bor′ 2 − handles)
                                                                    ′
by introducing a plumbing of the handles attached to li , li and also of the
                                                                               fBor ,
handles attached to li′ , li , for each i. There is an obvious involution τ on M
     fBor /τ ∼
with M        = MBor , and comparing with Figure 4, one observes that this is
the double cover corresponding to the required homomorphism π1 (MBor ) −→
Z/2.
Observe that π2 (MfBor ) consists of six hyperbolic planes, and we represent their
bases by 2-spheres as shown in Figure 3. The special intersection point in each
hyperbolic pair is a lift in the cover of the plumbing point of the cores of the
2-handles attached to B 4 . These cores are capped off with disks (drawn dotted
in the figure) bounded by the Borromean rings in the two lifts of the 4-ball, and
the extra intersection points between the spheres are the intersections between


Algebraic & Geometric Topology, Volume 5 (2005)

1724                                                               Vyacheslav S. Krushkal




                                4
                            B




                            B4
   Bor = (l1 , l2 , l3 )
                                    l1 , l1′                                     l3 , l3′
                                                               l2 , l2′




               Figure 3: The Borromean rings, and the double cover M Bor


the disks. The key point of the argument is the choice of the disks bounded by
the Borromean rings. Two different ways of unlinking them are used in the two
lifts of the 4−ball: in one of them, B 4 , the components l2 , l2′ intersect l1 , l1′ . In
                      4     ′               ′
the other one, B , l2 , l2 intersect l3 , l 3 . To be specific, we introduce a notation
for the spheres formed by the cores of the 2−handles capped off with the disks:
Si , Si′ , i = 1, 2, 3 are the spheres in B 4 ∪ 2−handles attached to Bor ∪ Bor′ .
Here the index reflects the component of the link giving rise to the sphere. The
                               4
spheres in the other lift, B ∪2−handles attached along Bor ∪Bor′ , are denoted
             ′
by S i , S i , i = 1, 2, 3. The six hyperbolic planes in π2 (M    fBor ) are formed by
                                  ′               ′
the pairs of 2−spheres (Si , S i ) and (S i , Si ), i = 1, 2, 3. The spheres in each
pair intersect in precisely one point: the plumbing point of the corresponding
2−handles.

Note that none of the spheres have self-intersections (this is true even without
                                             ′
taking a cover, in MBor ). Moreover, S 1 , S 1 , S3 , S3′ are embedded disjointly from
other spheres, except for the special intersection (plumbing) points, and they
                                                                         ′
provide embedded transverse spheres (cf [6, 1.9]) for S1 , S1′ , S 3 , S 3 . Due to the
                                                                      4
choice of the disks bounded by the link components in B 4 , B , each of their
                                                               ′
intersections involves one of the spheres S1 , S1′ , S 3 , S 3 . Using the embedded
duals, one resolves all extra intersection points among the spheres, getting six
smoothly embedded hyperbolic pairs. More specifically (see Figure 3) the in-


Algebraic & Geometric Topology, Volume 5 (2005)

Surgery and involutions on 4-manifolds                                             1725


                                                                p1
     Γ

    q1                        q3′
                                                                                   p3
    q1′
                                                           p2


Figure 4: The double cover Γ −→ S 1 ∨ S 1 ∨ S 1 , corresponding to the homomorphism
Free3 −→ Z/2Z, sending each “preferred” generator to the non-trivial element.


                                                                                        ′
tersections of S1 , S1′ with S2 , S2′ are resolved by adding parallel copies of S 1 , S 1
                                                      ′              ′
to S2 , S2′ . Similarly, the intersections of S 2 , S 2 with S 3 , S 3 are eliminated by
                                              ′
adding parallel copies of S3 , S3′ to S 2 , S 2 . Surgering out the resulting embed-
ded hyperbolic pairs, one gets a smooth 4-manifold M homotopy equivalent to
the double cover Γ of ∨3 S 1 .

The double cover in the general case (when the link Bor is further Bing doubled
and ramified) is constructed analogously. After additional Bing doubling, the
link can still be changed into the unlink by intersecting a single pair of compo-
nents — there is actually more freedom in choosing the pair of components to
intersect. The proof goes through without significant changes also for ramified
Bing doubles (when one takes parallel copies of the components before Bing
doubling them). Any such link is obtained from the Hopf link H = (a, b) by
an iterated application of taking parallel copies and Bing doubling, so that the
resulting link has trivial linking numbers. During the first iteration, at least
one of the components of H , say a, and all of its parallel copies, are going to be
Bing doubled. Label the other component, b, by 1, and the Bing doubles of a
and of its parallel copies by 2 and 3. (That is, the two components of each such
Bing double are labeled by 2 and 3 respectively — pick any of the two possible
labelings. Note that, in particular the resulting link becomes the unlink if one
removes all components with the label i, for any given i ∈ {1, 2, 3}.) During
the following iterations, the parallel copies and Bing doubles inherit the label of
the component to which the operation is applied. In this general case, construct
the double cover as above. In one lift of the 4−ball, one only has intersections
of the components labeled by 1 and 2. In the other lift, there are only in-
tersections involving the labels 2, 3. The rest of the proof is identical to the
above, with individual link components and spheres labeled by i replaced with
the collections of all link components and spheres labeled by i, i = 1, 2, 3.


Algebraic & Geometric Topology, Volume 5 (2005)

1726                                                           Vyacheslav S. Krushkal




                                                     B1              B2


       B

                      A



Sc
                                                          A1    A2
               γ                      γ1                                          γ2



Figure 5: The double cover, corresponding to the homomorhism π1 S c → Z/2 which
sends both double point loops to the non-trivial element. The lifts γ 1 , γ 2 bound
(non-equivariant) disjoint embedded disks — surgeries along the caps A1 and B 2 re-
spectively. (The caps which are not used are drawn dotted.)


A different class of canonical problems — for the disk embedding conjecture
— is provided by capped gropes, see [6, 2.1]. Recall that the disk embedding
conjecture is the lemma underlying the proofs of the surgery and of the s-
cobordism theorems for good groups (in fact it is equivalent to both of these
theorems for any fundamental group). Capped gropes are thickenings of certain
special 2-complexes. They provide a class of canonical problems in the sense
that they may be found in the setting of the disk embedding conjecture [6, 5.1]
and therefore finding a flat embedded disk in them, with a given boundary, is
equivalent to the embedding problem in the general case. Here we present the
analogue of Theorem 1.2 in this context.
Consider the simplest case (which however captures the point of the argument):
a capped surface of genus one and with just one self-intersection point for each
cap. Recall the definition of a capped surface: start with a surface S with
one boundary component γ . A capped surface S c is obtained by attaching
disks to a symplectic basis of curves in S . Finally, intersections are introduced
among the caps (only self-intersections of the caps, in the current example). The
interiors of the caps are disjoint from the base surface S . Abusing the notation,
we use S c also to denote a special “untwisted” 4-dimensional thickening of
this 2-complex, see [6]. The capped surface S c is homotopy equivalent to the
wedge of two circles, in particular π1 (S c ) is the free group on two generators
(a “preferred” set of generators is given by the double point loops). Consider
the homomorphism π1 (S c ) −→ Z/2, sending each preferred generator to the


Algebraic & Geometric Topology, Volume 5 (2005)

Surgery and involutions on 4-manifolds                                         1727


non-trivial element, and consider the corresponding double cover Sec . It is an
exercise in elementary topology to check that Sec is given by two copies of the
capped surface of genus one, say with caps A1 , B 1 and A2 , B 2 respectively, such
that A1 intersects A2 in two points, and similarly B 1 intersects B 2 , Figure 5.
Note that no cap in the cover has self-intersections, and Figure 5 shows that
the two lifts γ 1 , γ 2 of the boundary curve γ bound disjoint embedded disks in
(the thickening of) Sec .

Consider the general genus one case: there may be self-intersections of each cap,
and also intersections between the two caps. A slight variation is necessary in
this case: consider the homomorphism π1 S c → Z/2 which sends all double
point loops, corresponding to self-intersections, to 1, and the double point
loops corresponding to the intersections of dual caps, to 0. The same choice
of caps as in the case above works here: the caps A1 , B 2 are still embedded
and disjoint (compare with the notation in Figure 5), since the intersections of
the dual caps lift to intersections between A1 and B 1 , and also to intersections
between A2 , B 2 .

Now consider the general case, given a capped grope (Gc , γ) of height n ≥ 1,
whose bottom stage surface S has genus g . Gc is obtained from S by attaching
capped gropes of height n − 1 along a symplectic basis of curves {αi , βi },
i = 1 . . . , g in S . Divide these capped gropes of height n−1 into two collections,
A and B , according to whether they are attached to one of the curves αi , or
one of the βi , respectively. In particular, all caps of Gc are labeled A or B .
π1 Gc is a free groups generated by the double point loops, and generalizing the
construction above, consider the homomorphism π1 Gc → Z/2 which sends all
double point loops, corresponding to A − A or B − B intersections, to 1, and
the double point loops corresponding to A − B intersections, to 0. The double
cover Gec consists of two capped gropes, and neither of them has any A − A or
B − B intersections, since none of the double point loops of this type in Gc lift
to the cover. (Here the two lifts of each cap of Gc in the cover inherit the label,
A or B , of the cap.) Moreover, no A−caps of one of the gropes in the cover
intersect B−caps of the other one, since each double point loop of type A − B
in Gc lifts to a closed loop in the cover. Now the two lifts γ1 , γ2 of γ bound
disjoint embedded disks: surgery along the A−caps in one grope, and surgery
along the B−caps in the other one. Thus we have proved:


Lemma 2.3 Let (Gc , γ) be a capped grope of height ≥ 1, with the attaching
                                            c
curve γ . Then there exists a double cover G −→ Gc such that both lifts γ 1 ,
                                    c
γ 2 bound disjoint smooth disks in G .


Algebraic & Geometric Topology, Volume 5 (2005)

1728                                                                 Vyacheslav S. Krushkal


Instead of using the lifts of different caps to surger the gropes in the cover, one
could also use all caps, together with the operation of contraction/pushoff ([6],
Chapter 2.3). For example, in the cover shown in Figure 5 the capped surfaces
can be contracted, and then the A1 — A2 intersections are pushed off one
contracted surface, while the B 1 — B 2 intersections are pushed off the other
one, to get disjoint embedded disks.

We note that the idea used here is different from the usual strategy for the proof
of the disk embedding theorem. Rather than trying to improve the intersections
between all caps, we pick certain “good” caps, sufficient for surgering the surface
into a disk, and discard the rest of the caps.



3      Involutions and fundamental domains.

In this section we start the analysis of the existence of free involutions on the
family of 4-manifolds constructed in Theorem 1.2. This provides an approach
to solving the canonical surgery problems. Conversely, an obstruction to the
existence of such involutions would be an obstruction to surgery or to the s-
cobordism theorem for free groups. We will point out, in particular, that the
analogous problem in the closed case has a simple solution.

The argument used in our analysis is familiar to the experts in the A, B -slice
problem. Stronger results are available in a related context (cf [5], [8]) although
a translation to this setting is not immediate. We include this discussion to
show a connection of our new reformulation of the surgery conjecture with the
previous developments in the field, and to illustrate the flavor of the problem.

Suppose there exists a required free involution on N (we use the notations
of theorem 1.2). Then the quotient is a 4-manifold M homotopy equivalent
to ∨3 S 1 and with ∂M ∼         = S 0 (Wh(Bor)). Consider a homotopy equivalence
M −→ ∨3 S 1 and lift it to a homotopy equivalence f of double covers, f : N −→
Γ. Choose p1 , p2 , p3 ∈ ∨3 S 1 , one point in the interior of each circle, and let
Xi = f −1 (pi ) (the transversality is provided by [11]). Consider the preimages
qi , qi′ ∈ Γ of pi , i = 1, 2, 3, Figures 4, 6. Let Yi = f −1 (qi ), Yi′ = f −1 (qi′ ). Denote
X = ∪Xi , Y = ∪i Yi , Y ′ = ∪Yi′ . Note that due to the Z/2-equivariance of f , Yi
is diffeomorphic to Yi′ , for each i. Using the standard surgery arguments, one
may assume that each Xi (and Yi , Yi′ ) is connected. Denote the two connected
components of N r (Y ∪ Y ′ ) by N0 and N1 .


Algebraic & Geometric Topology, Volume 5 (2005)

Surgery and involutions on 4-manifolds                                       1729




                  N1
                                                    f
                                                          q1

Y1     Y1′
                  N0                                       q1′
                                N                                              Γ


                                         Figure 6


We will consider homotopy equivalences f such that ∂Yi = Yi ∩ ∂N ∼      = ∂Yi′ =
Yi′ ∩ ∂N is a torus, for each i. We need a precise description of these tori
in ∂N . The manifold S 0 (Wh(Bor)) has the following convenient description.
Let Bor′ denote an untwisted parallel copy of the Borromean rings Bor. Then
S 0 (Wh(Bor)) is obtained from S 3 by cutting out tubular neighborhoods of
Bor ∪ Bor′ and identifying the corresponding boundary tori Ti , Ti′ , exchanging
the meridian and the longitude, i = 1, 2, 3. (The proof follows from lemma
2.1.) Abusing the notation, we denote the resulting tori in S 0 (Wh(Bor)) by
Ti again. Start with a map S 0 (Wh(Bor)) −→ ∨3 S 1 with these given point
inverses Ti , and consider its lift f∂ : ∂N −→ Γ. We will consider homotopy
equivalences f which are extensions of f∂ .
It follows from the above, in particular, that ∂N is obtained from two copies of
S 3 r (Bor ∪ Bor′ ) by identifying the boundary torus of a regular neighborhood
of a component li of Bor in one copy of S 3 with the boundary torus for the
component li′ in the other copy of S 3 , via the diffeomorphism exchanging the
meridian and the longitude, for each i.

Definition 3.1 In the general context (not assuming the existence of an invo-
lution on N ) we say that a homotopy equivalence f : N −→ Γ is weakly equiv-
ariant if the restriction of f to ∂N is equivariant with respect to the obvious
Z/2 action, and there is a diffeomorphism from Yi = f −1 (qi ) to Yi′ = f −1 (qi′ )
for i = 1, 2, 3, extending the diffeomorhism of their boundary tori ∂Yi −→ ∂Yi′ ,
given by the involution on ∂N .

The existence of a weakly equivariant homotopy equivalence is a necessary
condition for the existence of an involution on N . (Given an involution, both
Y , Y ′ are diffeomorphic to the point inverses X in the quotient.) Note that
this definition does not require that N0 is homeomorphic to N1 , and it does


Algebraic & Geometric Topology, Volume 5 (2005)

1730                                                        Vyacheslav S. Krushkal


not impose any equivariance conditions on the inclusions of Yi , Yi′ into N0 , N1 .
However one has that ∂N0 , ∂N1 are diffeomorphic, and are obtained from S 3
by cutting out a neighborhood of Bor ∪ Bor′ and gluing in Y, Y ′ where the
attaching maps of Yi , Yi′ differ by the diffeomorphism of the torus exchanging
the meridian and the longitude.

Note that in the analogous context: given a homotopy equivalence f from a
closed 4-manifold N to a graph, the point inverses may be arranged to be 3-
spheres [9], up to an s-cobordism of N . (Changing N by an s-cobordism is fine
for the applications to the surgery conjecture.) Similarly, if N has boundary but
∂Yi , ∂Yi′ are 2−spheres then there exists a homotopy equivalence f such that
the point inverses are 3−balls. In the problem we consider here ∂Yi , ∂Yi′ are
tori, and we will now show that a similar, naive, guess that there is a homotopy
equivalence with Yi ∼ = Yi′ = solid torus is not realized. (The complexity of this
problem is precisely in the interrelation between the homotopy type and the
boundary of the manifolds M , N .)

Lemma 3.1 There does not exist a weakly equivariant homotopy equivalence
f : N −→ Γ such that Yi = f −1 (qi ) is an integer homology S 1 × D 2 for each i.

Note the similarity with the A-B slice problem introduced in [4], see also [5],
[8]. Assuming the existence of M as above, it is shown in [4] that the com-
pactification of the universal cover M f is the 4-ball. The group of covering
transformations (the free group on three generators) acts on D 4 with a pre-
scribed action on the boundary. Roughly speaking, this approach to finding
an obstruction to surgery is in eliminating the possibilities for the fundamental
domains for such actions. Our present approach is in terms of the fundamental
domains in the double cover of M , and in terms of the closely related analysis
of the point inverses. Lemma 3.1 eliminates just the most basic possibility for
the point inverses Y, Y ′ . Note that this is not solely a program for finding an
obstruction to surgery: conversely, solving the problem in the affirmative would
construct an involution on N .


Proof First assume that Yi , Yi′ are diffeomorphic to S 1 × D 2 for each i, and
consider the Mayer-Vietoris sequence for the decomposition N = N0 ∪Y,Y ′ N1 .
The sequence splits, and we have
                0 −→ H2 (Y ∪ Y ′ ) −→ H2 (N0 ) ⊕ H2 (N1 ) −→ 0,

                0 −→ H1 (Y ∪ Y ′ ) −→ H1 (N0 ) ⊕ H1 (N1 ) −→ 0


Algebraic & Geometric Topology, Volume 5 (2005)

Surgery and involutions on 4-manifolds                                          1731


(all homology groups are considered with the integer coefficients). It follows
that H2 (N0 ) = H2 (N1 ) = 0. Since H1 (Y ∪ Y ′ ) ∼
                                                  = Z6 , the rank of one of the
groups H1 (N0 ), H1 (N1 ) is ≥ 3 — suppose this condition holds for N0 . It also
follows from the sequence above that the homomorphism H1 (∂N0 ) −→ H1 (N0 )
is onto.

On the other hand, ∂N0 is obtained from S 3 r (Bor ∪ Bor′ ) by gluing in Y ∪ Y ′ ,
where the attaching map of ∂Yi differs from the attaching map of ∂Yi′ by the
diffeomorphism of the torus exchanging the meridian and the longitude. Let
(pi , qi ) be the slope of the curve in Ti which bounds in the solid torus Yi . The
coordinates are given by (meridian, longitude) in Ti which is considered as the
boundary of a tubular neighborhood of a component of Bor in S 3 . Then (qi , pi )
is the slope in Ti′ which bounds in Yi′ . That is, ∂N0 is the Dehn surgery on S 3
along Bor ∪ Bor′ , with the surgery coefficients (pi , qi ) for the component li of
Bor and (qi , pi ) for the component li′ of Bor′ , i = 1, 2, 3.

It follows from this description that, considering various possibilities for the
pairs (pi , qi ), the maximal possible rank of H1 (∂N0 ) is 3. Combining this with
the facts that rk(H1 (N0 )) ≥ 3 and the map H1 (∂N0 ) −→ H1 (N0 ) is onto, we
conclude that rk(H1 (∂N0 )) = rk(H1 (N0 )) = 3. Moreover, if any of the pairs
(pi , qi ) is not equal to (1, 0) or (0, 1) then the rank of H1 (∂N0 ) is less than 3.
Therefore assume that each pair (pi , qi ) is equal to either (1, 0) or (0, 1). In
each of these cases ∂N0 = S 0 Bor, the zero-framed surgery on the Borromean
rings, and π1 (∂N0 ) is abelian.

Since H1 (∂N0 ) −→ H1 (N0 ) is an isomorphism and H2 (∂N0 ) −→ H2 (N0 ) is
onto, by Stallings theorem [12] the inclusion ∂N0 ֒→ N0 induces an isomorphism
on π1 /π1k for all k . Here π k denotes the k th term of the lower central series of a
group π . Another application of Stallings theorem, to an inclusion ∨3 S 1 ֒→ N0 ,
implies that π1 (N0 )/π1 (N0 )k is isomorphic to F3 /F3k for all k , where F3 is the
free group on three generators. This is a contradiction since π1 (∂N0 ) is abelian.

In the the general case, Yi is an integer homology S 1 × D 2 , for each i. Consider
the degree one maps Yi −→ S 1 ×D 2 , Yi′ −→ S 1 ×D 2 , which are diffeomorphisms
of the boundaries. Gluing these maps with the identity on S 3 r (Bor ∪ Bor′ ),
one has a map ∂N0 −→ S 0 Bor inducing an isomorphism on homology. By
Stallings theorem, this map induces an isomorphism of nilpotent quotients of
the fundamental groups, in particular π1 (∂N0 ) is abelian. The Mayer-Vietoris
calculation for the decomposition N r (Y ∪ Y ′ ) = N0 ∪ N1 is still valid, showing
that π1 (N0 )/π1 (N0 )k ∼
                        = F3 /F3k for all k and giving a contradiction as above.


Algebraic & Geometric Topology, Volume 5 (2005)

1732                                                          Vyacheslav S. Krushkal


References

  [1] S K Donaldson, An application of gauge theory to four-dimensional topology,
      J. Differential Geom. 18 (1983) 279–315 MR710056
  [2] M H Freedman, The topology of four-dimensional manifolds, J. Differential
      Geom. 17 (1982) 357–453 MR679066
  [3] M H Freedman, The disk theorem for four-dimensional manifolds, from: “Pro-
      ceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. 1, 2 (Warsaw,
      1983)”, PWN, Warsaw (1984) 647–663 MR804721
  [4] M H Freedman, A geometric reformulation of 4-dimensional surgery, Topol-
      ogy Appl. 24 (1986) 133–141 MR872483
  [5] M H Freedman, X-S Lin, On the (A, B)-slice problem, Topology 28 (1989)
      91–110 MR991101
  [6] M H Freedman, F Quinn, Topology of 4-manifolds, Princeton Mathematical
      Series 39, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ (1990) MR1201584
  [7] M H Freedman, P Teichner, 4-manifold topology. I. Subexponential groups,
      Invent. Math. 122 (1995) 509–529 MR1359602
  [8] V S Krushkal, On the relative slice problem and four-dimensional topological
      surgery, Math. Ann. 315 (1999) 363–396 MR1725988
  [9] V S Krushkal, R Lee, Surgery on closed 4-manifolds with free fundamental
      group, Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 133 (2002) 305–310 MR1912403
 [10] V S Krushkal, F Quinn, Subexponential groups in 4-manifold topology,
      Geom. Topol. 4 (2000) 407–430 MR1796498
 [11] F Quinn, Ends of maps. III. Dimensions 4 and 5, J. Differential Geom. 17
      (1982) 503–521 MR679069
 [12] J Stallings, Homology and central series of groups, J. Algebra 2 (1965) 170–181
      MR0175956

Department of Mathematics, University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA
Email: krushkal@virginia.edu                                 Received: 17 May 2005




Algebraic & Geometric Topology, Volume 5 (2005)

