2.12. Caﬀarelli’s interior regularity results

   Let Ω be a bounded open convex set in Rn and f a function on Ω.
Consider the following boundary value problem for a convex function φ in
Ω, continuous up to the boundary:

                      M A(φ) = f dx in Ω, φ = 0 on ∂Ω

   Theorem 2.24 (Caﬀarelli [20, 18]). — Assume that f > 0. Then any
(convex) solution φ on Ω of the previous equation is

    • strictly convex and locally C 1,α for some α > 0 if there exists a con-
      stant C such that 1/C ⩽ f ⩽ C.
                     2,p
    • in the class Wloc  for any p > 1, if f is continuous
    • smooth if f is smooth

   Proof. — For the proof of the ﬁrst point we ﬁrst recall the following
special case of Cor 2 in[20]: if the following holds in the viscosity sense;

                   1/Cdx ⩽ M A(φ) ⩽ Cdx, φ = 0 on ∂Ω

                                     – 679 –
                        Robert J. Berman, Bo Berndtsson


in a bounded set Ω, then φ is strictly convex in Ω. Moreover, as pointed out
in [20] if the previous inequalities hold weakly (i.e. in the sense of Alexan-
drov) then they hold in the viscosity sense (see also Prop 1.3.4 in [36] where
it is assumed that f is continuous, which anyway will always be the case
in this paper). Hence φ is strictly convex in our case. But then, as shown
in [19], if follows from the previous diﬀerential inequalities that φ is in fact
locally C 1,α for some α > 0. As for the second point it is contained in the
main result in [18] and the ﬁnal point then follows from Evans-Krylov theory
for fully non-linear elliptic operators follows by standard linear bootstrap-
ping.         

                 3. Toric log Fano varieties, polytopes
                       and Kähler-Ricci solitons

3.1. Log Fano varieties

    Let X be an n−dimensional normal compact projective variety. Recall
that a (Weil-) divisor D on X is a formal sum of prime divisors, i.e. codi-
mension one irreducible subvarieties. As usual we will often identify divisors
up to linear equivalence: D ∼ D if D − D is principal, i.e. equal to the
zero divisor of a rational function on X. A divisor D is a Cartier divisor
if it is locally principal and we can hence identify Cartier divisors on X
with line bundles on X in the standard manner. In case X is regular these
two notions of divisors coincide. We will use additive notation for tensor
products of line bundles on X.

    When X is smooth the canonical line bundle KX is deﬁned as the top-
exterior power of the cotangent bundle of X. When X is singular KX is
well-deﬁned on the regular locus Xreg of X and KX is said to be Q−Cartier
(also called a Q−line bundle) if there is a positive number r such that rKX
extends from Xreg to a line bundle deﬁned on all of X. The minimal such
integer r is called the Gorenstein index of X and X is said to be Gorenstein
if r is equal to one.

    A normal variety X is said to be Fano if −KX is Q−Cartier and ample
(in the literature such a variety is sometimes said to be a Q−Fano variety).
When X is toric any Fano variety has log-terminal singularities (also called
Kawamata log-terminal, or klt for short); see Remark 3.6. Such singularities
play a key role in the Minimal Model Program (MMP); see [12] and refe-
rences therein. From the algebro-geometric point of view klt singularities
are deﬁned in terms of discrepancies on resolutions of X, but there is also a
direct analytical deﬁnition on X that is the one that we will use here (see
below).

                                   – 680 –
  Real Monge-Ampère equations and Kähler-Ricci solitons on toric log Fano varieties


   A log pair (X, ∆) (in the sense of MMP) consists of a normal variety X
