                                                   QUANTITATIVE STABILITY FOR MINKOWSKI’S PROBLEM


                                                     KÁROLY BÖRÖCZKY, JOÃO MIGUEL MACHADO, AND JOÃO P. G. RAMOS


                                                   Abstract. We derive quantitative stability results for Minkowski bodies, as well as their
                                                   counterparts, the Lp -Minkowski bodies in the range 1 ≤ p ̸= n. We prove that, for every
                                                   pair of probability measures µ, ν satisfying a quantitative form of the classical dispersion
                                                   assumptions yielding existence of such bodies, we have a control of the form
                                                                                                1                                     1
                                                                                                                                  1+ n−1
                                                           inf dH (Eµ , x + Eν ) ≤ CdC (µ, ν) n−1 ,   α(Eµ , Eν )2 ≤ CdC (µ, ν)            ,
                                                          x∈Rn




arXiv:2603.17726v3 [math.AP] 13 May 2026
                                                   where dH denotes the Hausdorff distance, α denotes the Fraenkel asymmetry and dC is
                                                   the dual-convex distance of probability measures on the sphere. Our arguments are based
                                                   on a variational problem whose optimizers are Minkowski bodies, for which we can obtain
                                                   strong-concavity properties with the quantitative Brunn-Minkowski and isoperimetric
                                                   inequalities. While the exponent in the Hausdorff distance is sharp, the exponent in the
                                                   Fraenkel asymmetry is optimal in dimension 2.

                                                   Keywords. Lp Minkowski problem, quantitative stability, Wulff shape
                                                   2020 Mathematics Subject Classification. 52A21, 52A40, 49Q10




                                                                                             Contents
                                             1. Overview on Minkowski problems                                                                     1
                                             Acknowledgments                                                                                       5
                                             2. Preliminaries on convex bodies and Minkowski problems                                              5
                                             2.1. Inner and circumradii estimates with Θ(SK )                                                      7
                                             2.2. On the Lp -Minkowski problem for p > 1                                                           7
                                             3. Quantitative stability for p = 1                                                                  12
                                             3.1. Proof of Theorem 1.1                                                                            13
                                             4. Quantitative stability for 1 < p ̸= n                                                             17
                                             4.1. Quantitative versions of Lp Brunn-Minkowski and isoperimetric inequalities                      17
                                             4.2. Proof of Theorem 1.2                                                                            19
                                             References                                                                                           22



                                                                       1. Overview on Minkowski problems
                                              Given a non-trivial finite Borel measure µ on the unit sphere Sn−1 of the Euclidean space
                                            n
                                           R , Minkowski asked under what conditions one can find a convex body whose normal
                                           vectors are distributed according to µ. This is now known as Minkowski’s problem and
                                           has been studied extensively since the beginning of the 20th century. More precisely, let
                                           E ⊂ Rn be a convex body and let νE : ∂E 7→ Sn−1 denote its Gauss map, when ∂E is a
                                           (n − 1)-dimensional C 1 manifold νE (x) coincides with the outwards unit normal of ∂E at
                                           the point x, then the surface measure of E is given by
                                                                                      def.
                                           (1.1)                                  SE = (νE )♯ Hn−1         ∂E,
                                           where Hn−1 denotes the (n−1)-dimensional Hausdorff measure of Rn . Since Sλ E = λn−1 SE
                                           holds for any λ > 0, we may assume that our Borel measure µ is a probability distribution;
                                           namely, µ ∈ P(Sn−1 ). The Minkowski problem can then be phrased as:
                                                    Given µ ∈ P(Sn−1 ), is there a convex body E such that SE = µ?
                                           Extending Minkowski’s work [Min03,Min11], this question was answered by Alexandrov [Ale38,
                                           Ale96] positively if, and only if, the barycenter in Rn of the measure µ on Sn−1 is the origin
                                                                                                1
2           KÁROLY BÖRÖCZKY, JOÃO MIGUEL MACHADO, AND JOÃO P. G. RAMOS


and µ is not supported on any hyperplane. He showed that these objects are unique up
to translations, and we let Eµ be the unique convex body centered at the origin such that
SEµ = µ. These are called Minkowski bodies.
   Whenever dµ = f d(Hn−1 Sn−1 ), the support functions associated with Minkowski bodies
solve a corresponding Monge-Ampère equation on Sn−1 given
(1.2)                               det(∇2Sn−1 h + hI) = f,
where ∇Sn−1 h is the spherical gradient and ∇2Sn−1 h is the spherical Hessian of h with respect
to a moving frame. Regularity of the solution of (1.2) was intensively investigated by
Nirenberg [Nir53], Cheng, Yau [CY76] and Pogorelov [Pog64], and the final solution was
only provided by Caffarelli [Caf90a,Caf90b] in 1990 (see Figalli [Fig17] and Trudinger, Wang
[TW08] for a detailed discussion).
   In the present work, we address the question of stability of Minkowski bodies. That is,
can we estimate a suitable distance between two Minkowski bodies Eµ , Eν with a suitable
distance between µ, ν? It is well known that Minkowski bodies can be obtained as solutions
to an appropriated variational problem, which will be discussed further on, so that the
question of stability can be seen as stability of minimizers with respect to a parameter of
the energy functional.
   The stability issue for this problem was already addressed by Hug-Schneider [HS02] fol-
lowing the works of Diskant [Dis72] on the stability of the isoperimetric inequality. They
show a bound of the form
                             inf dH (Eµ , x0 + Eν )n ≤ C dC (µ, ν),
                           x0 ∈Rn

where the constant C depends on the inner and circumradii of Eµ and Eν , dH is the Hausdorff
distance between convex bodies, and dC denotes the convex-dual distance defined for two
measures µ, ν over Sn−1 as
                                              ˆ
                                   def.
(1.3)                    dC (µ, ν) = sup           hK d(µ − ν) ,
                                       K⊆B1 (0)       Sn−1

where the supremum is taken over all convex bodies included in the unit ball, and hK
corresponds to the support function of K, defined in (2.1). Their work was then leveraged
by Abdallah and Mérigot [AM15] in the task of reconstructing convex bodies from random
measurements of their normals.
   In the present work, we prove stability results assuming the form
                                                                 1
                           inf dH (Eµ , x0 + Eν ) ≤ CdC (µ, ν) n−1 ,
                         x0 ∈Rn
(1.4)                                                               1
                                                  2             1+ n−1
                                     α(Eµ , Eν ) ≤ CdC (µ, ν)            ,
for some constant C. Here α denotes the Fraenkel asymmetry, used for stability statements
by [FMP08] in the case of the isoperimetric inequality and by [FMP10] in the case of the
more general anisotropic isoperimetric inequality, defined as
                                                                       
                           def.    |E∆(x0 + rF )|         x0 ∈ Rn ,
(1.5)            α(E, F ) = inf                    : n                    .
                                         |E|         r |F | = |E|, r > 0
It holds that α(E, F ) = α(F, E), and α(E, F ) = 0 if and only if E and F are homothetic,
so that α becomes a distance on the equivalence class of homotheties. Furthermore, in
examples 3.4 and 3.5 we show that the exponent for the Hausdorff distance estimate is
sharp, and that the exponent for the Fraenkel asymmetry is sharp in dimension 2, showing
therefore a Lipschitz behavior.
   Let us briefly discuss the choice of distances in (1.4). Since the support functions hK
are 1-Lipschitz for K ⊂ B1 , whenever µ, ν are probability measures it follows directly that
dC (µ, ν) ≤ W1 (µ, ν), the 1-Wasserstein distance defined via the theory of optimal transport,
see [San15, ABS21] for its definition and basic properties. Therefore, a direct corollary
is a stability result formulated w.r.t. W1 . Since the Wasserstein distances, on compact
ambient spaces, metrize weak convergence of measures, estimate (1.4) provides a way of
approximating general convex bodies with polygons, without any regularity or curvature
assumption.
                      QUANTITATIVE STABILITY FOR MINKOWSKI’S PROBLEM                                          3


   Before commenting on the left-hand side of (1.4), let us discuss why we should expect
inequality (1.4) to hold. In finite-dimensional variational problems, and more generally in
Hilbert spaces, quantitative stability of minimizers is typically a consequence of favorable
coercivity properties of the functional being optimized [BS13]. This mechanism is often
captured by Łojasiewicz inequalities [Loj65], which relate the energy gap to a distance of a
point from the set of minimizers. A function f satisfies a Łojasiewicz inequality if it holds
for all x that

(1.6)                           dist(x, argmin f )θ ≤ C(f (x) − inf f )

for some θ > 0 and C > 0.1 In this sense, the usage of the Fraenkel asymetry in (1.4) reflects
naturally these inequalities in the form of a distance to the set o maximizers of the functional
Fµ used in your proof, see Lemma 3.1 and also Remark 3.3 following it. Such inequalities
reflect an underlying curvature of the energy landscape and play a central role in stability
and convergence results for associated gradient flows. Indeed, if f is α-strongly convex this
identity is true with θ = 2 and C = α−1 . Extensions of this philosophy to non-linear spaces,
such as the Wasserstein space of probability measures, have been developed in recent years,
where functional inequalities are reinterpreted as generalized Łojasiewicz inequalities, see
for instance [BB18].
   The situation for the Minkowski problem is fundamentally different. The natural topolo-
gies on the space of convex bodies, such as Hausdorff convergence or L1 -convergence are
essentially flat, so instead of leveraging curvature, stability must arise from the rigidity
of convex geometry. In this case, convexity/concavity stems naturally from the classical
Brunn-Minkowski inequality, the reader is referred to [Gar02, Sch14, BFR25] for comprehen-
sive surveys on the many applications of the Brunn-Minkowski theory. It can be stated as
follows: given two convex bodies E, F ⊂ Rn , for all t ∈ (0, 1), we have that
                                                 1          1                1
(1.7)                         |tE + (1 − t)F | n ≥ t|E| n + (1 − t)|F | n ,

where equality holds if and only if E and F are equal up a translation and a dilation.
   In this context, we propose a variational problem whose optimizers are translations and
dilations of Minkowski bodies associated with a prescribed measure µ, that act as a per-
turbation parameter. For this energy the quantitative stability of the Brunn-Minkowski
inequality, see for instance [FMP09, FJ17, FvHT24], assumes the role of a Łojasiewicz in-
equality and allows us to deduce stability for Minkowski bodies. This explains the exponent
2 on the Fraenkel asymmetry term as the sharp exponent for the quantitative stability
versions of both the Brunn-Minkowski and the Wulff isoperimetric inequalities, see for in-
stance [FMP08, FMP10, FJ17]. The exponent on the right-hand side 1 + n1 is obtained by
combining a gradient-concavity principle with an older quantitative version of isoperimetry
due to Diskant [Dis72].
   Previous results from Hug and Schneider [HS02] obtain stability results conditioned to
having bounds on the inner and circumradii of Minkowski bodies. This conditioning on
geometric bounds in [HS02] seem inevitable if we do not make quantitative the assumption
of Alexandrov’s theorem, that µ is not concentrated on a hyperplane, which is reflected in
the constant C from (1.4). Notice that if such an inequality was true for any pair of measures
µ, ν, we could take µ = 12 δθ + 12 δ−θ , for some θ ∈ Sn−1 , a sequence (µk )k∈N not supported in
a hyperplane and converging to µ in the Wasserstein distance. As µk is a Cauchy sequence
for W1 , if (1.4) holds for all measures in P(Sn−1 ) so will be the associated sequence of
Minkowski bodies Ek , which would allow to construct a Minkowski body for µ. This is
clearly absurd, since Alexandrov’s condition of µ not being supported on a hyperplane is
necessary and sufficient for the existence of a Minkowski body.
   Therefore, to obtain a result such as (1.4), we need to make quantitative the assumption
of µ not being concentrated on a hyperplane. This idea has been exploited in a recent work
of the second and third authors [MR25] concerning the quantitative stability of moment

  1For sufficiently smooth energies f , it is equivalent to having an inequality of the form (f (x) − inf f )θ ≤
C∥∇f (x)∥.
4           KÁROLY BÖRÖCZKY, JOÃO MIGUEL MACHADO, AND JOÃO P. G. RAMOS


measures through the following functional
                                                    ˆ
                                   def.
(1.8)                         Θ(µ) =       inf                 |θ · x|dµ(x).
                                          θ∈Sn−1        Sn−1
If follows directly from the definition that Θ(µ) > 0 if and only if µ is not supported on
a hyperplane, and hence it can be used as quantitative measure of how this condition is
satisfied. In addition, if Eµ is the centered Minkowski body associated to µ, we have for all
θ ∈ Sn−1 that
              ˆ                    ˆ
(1.9)               |θ · y|dµ(y) =      |θ · νEµ (x)|dHn−1 (x) = Hn−1 (projθ⊥ Eµ ),
              Sn−1                ∂Eµ

where the last equality is known as Cauchy’s projection formula. As a result, the quantity
Θ(µ) gives a lower bound on the size of the projections of Eµ and hence on the size of
Eµ itself. See Figure 1 for an illustration of the role of this functional in the construction
proposed in the previous paragraph. As a result, the constant C in (1.4) will be uniform
in the class of measures µ ∈ P(Sn−1 ) such that Θ(µ) ≥ ϑ, and C = Cn,ϑ . As a result,
the stability of Minkowski bodies degenerates as µ and ν approach measures supported on
hyperplanes. The rigorous statement of our quantitative stability result is as follows.

                                                                             Θ(µ)
                           Θ(µ)                                                      Θ(µ) = 0




                          Sn−1                                        Sn−1               Sn−1




            Figure 1. Family of ellipsoids collapsing to a line as Θ goes to 0.


Theorem 1.1. Let µ, ν ∈ P(Sn−1 ) be two measures such that Θ(µ), Θ(ν) ≥ ϑ > 0, and let
Eµ , Eν be the associated Minkowski bodies centered at the origin. Then there is a constant
Cϑ,n > 0 depending only on ϑ and the dimension n such that
                                                                                 1
(1.10)                    inf dH (Eµ , x0 + Eν ) ≤ Cϑ,n dC (µ, ν) n−1 ,
                         x0 ∈Rn
                    1
where the exponent n−1 is optimal, and
                                                                        1
                                          2                         1+ n−1
(1.11)                       α(Eµ , Eν ) ≤ Cϑ,n dC (µ, ν)                    ,
with a sharp exponent in dimension 2.
   It turns out that our techniques are also applicable to the Lp -Minkowski problems for all
1 ≤ p ̸= n. Given a convex body E, Lutwak [Lut93,Lut96] defines the Lp curvature measure
as
                                                 def.
(1.12)                                  SE,p = h1−p
                                                E SE ,

and one can ask the same question as before, under which conditions on µ ∈ P(Sn−1 ) can
we find a convex body Eµ,p whose Lp surface measure coincides with µ? In the regime
1 ≤ p ̸= n, this problem is well understood, see for instance [CY76, HLYZ05, Bör, HYZ25].
On the other hand, whenever dµ = f d(Hn−1 Sn−1 ) the corresponding Monge-Ampère
equation becomes
                                  det(∇2 h + hI) = hp−1 f.
                   QUANTITATIVE STABILITY FOR MINKOWSKI’S PROBLEM                                    5


   In this case, the Lp surface measure is not translation invariant, as translating a convex
body changes its support function. Therefore, this Lp Minkowski body is unique whenever
it exists, instead of unique up to translations, and we no longer need to assume that the
measure µ is centered at the origin. In fact, we have existence and uniqueness whenever µ
is not concentrated on any half space, that is
                                                          def.
(1.13)         µ(Hθ+ ) > 0, for all θ ∈ Sn−1 where Hθ+ = {x ∈ Rn : x · θ > 0}.
In a sense, this is the correct dispersion assumption for the p = 1 case a well, but with
the further assumption that µ is centered, it becomes equivalent to assuming Θ(µ) > 0.
Without the centering assumption on µ in the Lp case, the natural functional to make (1.13)
quantitative is
                                              ˆ
                                   def.
(1.14)                      Θ+ (µ) = inf  n−1
                                                 (θ · x)+ dµ(x).
                                         θ∈S     Sn−1

   Since we always have Θ(µ) ≥ Θ+ (µ), we deduce a general control of the geometry of a
convex body E by means of the quantity Θ(SE,p ). Whereas, for the isoperimetric/Brunn-
Minkowski rigidity, we exploit the fact that this variant is closely related to the Lp Brunn-
Minkowski theory started by Lutwak [Lut93,Lut96] extending earlier results by Firey [Fir62,
Fir74], see also the recent monograph covering the state of the art on this topic [BFR25]. In
Section 4.1, we leverage the quantitative stability for the Brunn-Minkowski and isoperimetric
inequalities in the p = 1 case to obtain Lp counterparts of such inequalities. This discussion
gives us all the elements necessary to generalize the proof of Theorem 1.1 to the Lp setting.
Theorem 1.2. Consider 1 < p ̸= n, and let µ, ν ∈ P(Sn−1 ) be two measures such that
Θ+ (µ), Θ+ (ν) ≥ ϑ > 0. Consider their associated Lp Minkowski bodies Eµ,p , Eν,p . Then
there is a constant Cϑ,n,p > 0 depending only on ϑ, the dimension n, and the parameter p
such that
                                                     1
                                                                                  2
(1.15)   infn dH (Eµ,p , x + Eν,p ) ≤ Cϑ,n,p dC (µ, ν) n , and α(Eµ,p , Eν,p ) ≤ Cϑ,n,p dC (µ, ν).
         x∈R

  If in addition µ, ν are centered at the origin, then we have a control in Hausdorff distance
                                                                              1
                         inf dH (Eµ,p , x + Eν,p ) ≤ Cϑ,n,p dC (µ, ν) n−1 ,
                        x∈Rn

and the stronger control in Fraenkel asymmetry
                                                                     1
                                          2                      1+ n−1
                            α(Eµ,p , Eν,p ) ≤ Cϑ,n,p dC (µ, ν)            ,
where Cϑ,n,p is a constant depending only on ϑ, n, and p.
   Concerning the structure of the paper, Section 2 introduces the main notions used in the
paper, as well as the control of the geometry of convex bodies with the functional Θ applied
to its surface measures and Lp surface measures. The stability versions Theorem 1.1 of the
classical Minkowski problem is proved in Section 3, and Theorem 1.2 of the Lp -Minkowski
problem for 1 < p ̸= n is proved in Section 4.

                                     Acknowledgments
  Böröczky was partially supported by NKKP grant 150613. J.M.M. would like to thank
Guillaume Carlier and Quentin Mérigot for stimulating discussions on Minkowski problems.
He also warmly thanks the hospitality of IMPA, where the majority of this work was prepared
