                                             QUANTITATIVE STABILITY FOR THE BRASCAMP-LIEB INEQUALITY
                                                             AND MOMENT MEASURES

                                                                     JOÃO MIGUEL MACHADO AND JOÃO P. G. RAMOS


                                                  Abstract. We develop a quantitative stability theory for moment measures based on a new
                                                  sharp uniform stability principle for the Brascamp–Lieb variance inequality in terms of the L1 -
                                                  distance. Our results yield structural stability estimates for solutions of the moment-measure
                                                  problem that are uniform over a natural class of convex functions, thereby addressing several
                                                  questions that have been open in this direction.
                                                     A key novelty of our approach is that the Brascamp–Lieb stability bound is not only sharp
                                                  in its stability exponent, but also uniform across a broad class of convex potentials. This
                                                  uniformity is absent from previous results in the literature and, beyond its intrinsic mathematical
                                                  interest, it is the mechanism that allows stability of the Brascamp–Lieb inequality to transfer
                                                  to nonlinear variational problems such as the moment-measure problem. We moreover show
                                                  that the L1 −nature of this stability estimate is sharp, in the sense that such a uniform estimate




arXiv:2511.22636v3 [math.FA] 29 Jul 2026
                                                  cannot hold in any Lp -metric, with p > 1.

                                                  Keywords. Brascamp-Lieb inequality, moment measures, optimal transport, stability, log-
                                                  concave measures
                                                  2020 Mathematics Subject Classification. 39B82, 26D10, 49Q22




                                                                                            Contents
                                             1. Introduction                                                                                             1
                                             1.1. Stability of the Brascamp-Lieb variance inequality                                                     2
                                             1.2. Stabiliy for moment measures                                                                           4
                                             1.3. Applications                                                                                           6
                                             LLM usage                                                                                                   8
                                             Acknowledgments                                                                                             8
                                             2. Some tools on optimal transport and functional inequalities                                              9
                                             2.1. A primer on optimal transport and Wasserstein distances                                                9
                                             2.2. General facts on moment measures                                                                      11
                                             2.3. State of the art on the Prékopa-Leindler inequality                                                   17
                                             3. Sharp Quantitative Stability for Brascamp-Lieb inequality                                               18
                                             3.1. Sharp quantitative stability in L1                                                                    19
                                             3.2. On the stability constant in the Lp -topology for 1 < p < +∞                                          24
                                             4. Quantitative Stability of Moment Measures                                                               28
                                             5. Applications                                                                                            31
                                             5.1. Stability in a compact domain                                                                         31
                                             5.2. Convergence rates w.r.t. regularization parameter                                                     32
                                             5.3. Stability over Rd                                                                                     34
                                             References                                                                                                 39



                                                                                        1. Introduction
                                             In recent years, the fields of calculus of variations and functional inequalities have become
                                           deeply interwined. If from one hand, many of the inequalities used in analysis and probability
                                                                                                  1
2                         JOÃO MIGUEL MACHADO AND JOÃO P. G. RAMOS

have deep variational interpretations, functional and geometric inequalities are fundamental in
the study of many variational problems. To name a few exemples we can cite the use of Sobolev
type inequalities in the stability of matter [LS10,Lew22], the use of isoperimetric type inequalities
in the study of shape optimization problems [LLR25], and more recently the use of Brascamp-
Lieb [BL76] and Prékopa-Leindler inequalities [Pré71, Pre73, Lei73] has become fundamental on
the quantitative stability theory of optimal transport [DM23, LM24, Let25].
   In this paper we address the quantitative stability of the moment-measure problem using
sharp functional inequalities as our main tool – as in, for instance, [BL76, CEK15, San16]. In-
deed, that connection between moment measures and the Brascamp–Lieb inequality has not
only been made rigorous several times over (see for instance [Kla14] where a regularity theory
for moment measures is combined with a suitable Brascamp-Lieb inequality to obtain bounds
on a Poincaré constant [KL25]), but they also have a common denominator in optimal transport
theory; see [San15, Vil09, ABS21].
   More specifically, the Brascamp-Lieb inequality is not only ubiquitous in the modern stability
theory of optimal transport, but it can also be derived with linearization arguments of trans-
portation type inequalities, as done for example in [CE17]. On the other hand, in [San16] it has
been showcased how solve the moment measure problem by minimizing functionals coming from
optimal transport. Indeed, we highlight, for instance, the classical work [BL00] where a proof
of Brascamp-Lieb’s variance inequality with a linearization argument using Prékopa-Leindler is
provided, as well as [CEK15] (or Section 2.2 below), where a variational approach for moment
measures is demonstrated, consisting on the maximization of a functional which is proven to be
concave with the same functional inequality.
   By employing the newly developed theory of quantitative stability for the Prékopa-Leindler
inequality in a series of recent works [BFR23, FR24, BFR25, FvHT25], we are able to obtain a
sharp stability version of the Brascamp-Lieb variance inequality, which is then used in order
to produce novel explicit stability estimates for moment measures. The main features of our
quantitative result is a stability constant that is completely independent of the convex potential
and the fact that it holds regardless of strong convexity assumptions, allowing even for flat
geometries.


1.1. Stability of the Brascamp-Lieb variance inequality. In order to describe our main
contributions, let us first recall the Brascamp-Lieb variance inequality [BL76, BL00]: given a
convex function φ : Rd → R, let ϱ ∝ e−φ be its associated Gibbs measure. Then for every
sufficiently smooth function f , the following quantity
                                      ˆ
                                 def.
(1.1)                   δBL (f ) =       (D2 φ)−1 ∇f, ∇f dϱ − Varϱ (f ) ≥ 0
                                    Rd

is non-negative. It is well known that the optimal functions for such inequality, which make
δBL (f ) vanish, are the affine functions on the geometry induced by the log-concave measure ϱ,
i.e. f (x) = a·∇φ(x)+b; see for instance [CE17] or the derivation at the start of Section 3. Given
the characterization of the optimizers of a functional inequality, the question of stability consists
of: under which topology can we estimate the distance of f to the manifold of optimizers?
   Results of this type have increasingly gained importance over the past two decades. Indeed,
the question of stability has been extensively studied in the case of the isoperimetric inequality
[FMP10], as well as in other geometric inequalities such as the Faber-Krahn inequality [BDPV15],
and, more recently, in [FMP10, FJ17, FvHT23, FvHT24, vHST21, vHST23] the Brunn-Minkowski
inequality, in [DT16, DEF+ 25, BK25] for Sobolev and log-Sobolev inequalities and relations with
non-linear evolution equations, in [BFR23, FvHT25, FR24] for the Prékopa-Leindler and Borell-
Brascamp-Lieb inequalities.
   In that vein, our first contribution is a sharp, uniform L1 −based stability estimate for the
Brascamp-Lieb variance inequality. In order to state it, we define the finite dimensional manifold
                     QUANTITATIVE STABILITY FOR BL AND MOMENT MEASURES                                   3

of optimal functions
                   def.
(1.2)          OBL = {f : Rd → R : f (x) = a · ∇φ(x) + b, for some a ∈ Rd , b ∈ R}.
When φ has a non-trivial domain, we set ∇φ(x) = 0 for x ∈ Rd \ dom φ. As a result, we
understand OBL as a subset of L1 (ϱ).
  Whenever φ is sufficiently smooth, namely essentially continuous see Definition 2.2 below, if
f ∈ OBL then the parameter b must be given by Eϱφ f since
                   ˆ               ˆ                        ˆ
           Eϱφ f =     f dϱφ = a ·    ∇φ(x)e−φ dx + b = a ·     ∇(e−φ )dx + b = b.
                          Rd              Rd                           Rd
Our first main result is then an estimate of the distance of a function f to the manifold of
optimizers
                                def.
(1.3)      distL1 (ϱφ ) (f, OBL ) =     inf ∥f − g∥L1 (ϱφ ) = inf     f − (a · ∇φ + Eϱφ f ) L1 (ϱφ ) ,
                                       g∈OBL                   a∈Rd
in terms of the deficit of the Brascamp-Lieb inequality.
   As described below, our result is valid regardless of the strong convexity of φ, this favorable
geometry was the main ingredient in previous quantitative results for this inequality in the
literature, see the discussion below for more details. Instead, we replace strong convexity with
the geometry of the moment measure associated with φ defined as
                                                  def.
                                               µφ = (∇φ)♯ ϱφ .
Our proof shows that as long as µφ is not concentrated in a hyperplane, we obtain information
on the distance of a general function to the set OBL . This non-concentration is equivalent to the
non-negativity of the following functional
                                                  ˆ
                                         def.
                              µ 7→ Θ(µ) = inf          | ⟨θ, x⟩ |dµ(x).
                                                 θ∈Sd−1   Rd
This same functional will later play a crucial role in the stability of moment measures.
   In addition, the geometry of moment measures not only is capable of accounting for flat
geometries, that is convex potential with vanishing Hessians, but also gives a stability constant
that is universal for this large class of convex functions whose moment measure is not concentrated
in a hyperplane.
Theorem 1.1. There exists a universal constant Cd depending only on the ambient dimension
such that for any convex function φ : Rd → R ∪ {+∞} such that
                                  ˆ
                              0<      e−φ < +∞ and Θ(µφ ) > 0,
                                         Rd
we have that
                                  distL1 (ϱφ ) (f, OBL ) ≤ Cd δBL (f )1/2
for all locally Lipschitz functions f ∈ L2 (ϱφ ). Moreover, the inequality above is sharp, in the
sense that the factor δBL (f )1/2 cannot be replaced by δBL (f )α for any α > 1/2.
   Regarding the scope of the class of convex functions that this result applies, we highlight that
from the theory o moment measures discussed below, any essentially continuous and convex φ
will satisfy the condition Θ(µφ ) > 0, but it also covers for log-concave densities supported on
convex bodies presenting jumps at the boundary of their domain.
   As the Brascamp-Lieb inequality is dimension-independent, the first efforts in the literature
into improving it were focused on next order terms that would exploit the ambient dimen-
sion [Har08, BGG18]. These results are equivalent with bounding the deficit from below with
a dimensional term which vanishes in the manifold of optimizers for this inequality. A similar
improvement was also obtained in [CE17], by measuring the distance to the manifold of optimal
functions with a L2 term in a geometry that compensates for the curvature induced by the po-
tential φ. This is very natural to expect for the Brascamp-Lieb inequality as it is closely related
4                         JOÃO MIGUEL MACHADO AND JOÃO P. G. RAMOS

to the spectral gap of the diffusion operator induced by ∇φ that is central to the carré du champ
method [BÉ06,BGL13,ABJ18], see also Section 3. We refer the reader to [LLR25] for a particular
version for the Gaussian Poincaré inequality with relations to uncertainty principles.
   The present work, on the other hand, is not only the first that proposes a quantitative stability
result for the Brascamp-Lieb variance inequality in full generality with a constant independent
of φ. In particular, the independence of our stability results on the convex function turns out
to be essential in order to deduce several novel results about the stability of moment measures,
as we shall see below. In addition, we crucially show show in Theorem 3.5 that this behavior is
only true for the L1 -stability above, in the sense that any stability result for the Brascamp-Lieb
inequality formulated with an Lp distance to the set of optimizers must have a stability constant
dependent of the convex potential. This shows that our L1 result is therefore sharp with respect
to the dependence of the stability constant on the convex potential. Our approach consists of
constructing a one-parametric family of potentials showing that if the L1 distance were to be
replaced by any other Lp distance for 1 < p < +∞, then the infimum

                                               δBL (f, ϱφ )1/2
                                  inf                                 = 0,
                               f ∈L2 (ϱφ ) distLp (ϱφ ) (f ; OBL (φ))
                                φ∈Cvxd

where Cvxd is a suitable space of convex functions, which is in fact much more restrictive than the
class of potentials for which Theorem 1.1 holds. The proof of this identity consists of constructing
a sequence of strongly convex potentials whose curvature (strong convexity parameter) vanishes
asymptotically and approaches the value 0 in the infimum above. This showcases how the
this behavior of the stability constant is closely connected with the ability to deal with convex
potentials having flat geometries.
   Our method of proof starts with the approach of Bobkov and Ledoux [BL00]. A main new
tool in our proof is then the usage of the newly developed sharp stability estimates for the
Prékopa-Leindler inequality stemming from the work of A. Figalli, P. van Hintum and M. Tiba
[FvHT25]. Nonetheless, the method of proof highlighted above only works a priori for a class of
slightly more regular convex functions, which satisfy a lower Hessian bound. For such classes,
we are able to exploit the fact that the moment measure associated with the potential φ has
full-dimensional support in order to deduce a non-degeneracy condition, which allows us to use
a limiting argument to conclude in that case.
   On the other hand, in the general case where no such uniform result is available, we need an
approximation result to finish the proof. Such a result employs, again, the non-degeneracy of
the support of the moment measures at hand in a crucial way, which highlights how deeply our
result is connected with the moment measure problem.

1.2. Stabiliy for moment measures. We now turn to our main application: quantitative
stability for the moment measure problem. Indeed, here we have a two-fold usage of stability
estimates: using the Prékopa-Leindler inequality, we obtain stability of the Gibbs measures in
the moment measures representation, while the quantitative version of Brascamp-Lieb yields
stability of the dual potentials.
   More concretely: given a convex function φ, we recall the notation of its associated Gibbs
probability measure
                                                       e−φ
                                           ϱφ = ´
                                               def.
(1.4)                                                     −φ
                                                             .
                                                      Rd e

On the other hand, given ψ also convex, which we will view informally as in the dual space of
variables of φ by frequently considering ψ = φ∗ , we define the moment measure associated with
ψ as
                                              def.
(1.5)                                     µψ = (∇ψ)♯ ϱψ .
                    QUANTITATIVE STABILITY FOR BL AND MOMENT MEASURES                                5

   The moment measure problem consists of the inverse question: under what conditions on a
probability measure µ ∈ P1 (R), the space of Radon probability distributions with finite first
moments, is there a convex function ψ such that µψ = µ? In [CEK15,San16] it was proven that µ
is centered at the origin and is not concentrated in a hyperplane of Rd if, and only if, there exists
a essentially continuous (see Definition 2.2) convex potential ψµ realizing this representation for
µ. In this case, ψµ is unique up to translations. Using the Prékopa-Leindler inequality, it was
shown in [CEK15] that the moment measure of ψµ is µ if and only if its Legendre transform
    def.
φµ = ψµ∗ is a maximizer of
                                              ˆ            ˆ
                                       def.           ∗
(1.6)                          Jµ (φ) = log      e−φ dx −      φdµ.
                                                Rd             Rd
   The same result was recovered in [San16] using optimal transport, but this time for a dual
perspective: a measure ϱ is the Gibbs measure in (1.5) if and only if it minimizes
                                         ˆ
                                    def.
(1.7)                        Eµ (ϱ) =      log ϱ(x)dϱ(x) + T (ϱ, µ),
                                          Rd
where T is the maximal correlation formulation of the quadratic optimal transport problem. The
reader is referred to Sections 2.1 and 2.2 for more details on optimal transport theory and for
general results on moment measures.
   The quantitative stability question that we wish to answer then becomes: given two measures
µ, ν, quantify the distance between either φµ , φν or ϱµ , ϱν . Since the variational characterization
described above is necessary and sufficient, one can only expect to answer this question as an
estimate on the distance to the optimal sets defined as
                                  def.                  def.
(1.8)                        Mµ = argmin Eµ ,        Nµ = argmax Jµ ,
which can be characterized as follows: fixed some reference ϱ0 ∈ Mµ and φ0 ∈ Nµ , the manifolds
of optimizers can be expressed as
                             Mµ = {ϱ0 (· − x0 ) : x0 ∈ Rd },
(1.9)
                              Nµ = {φ0 + (a · x + b) : a ∈ Rd , b ∈ R}.
On one hand, the structure of Mµ expresses the fact that moment measures are invariant
w.r.t. translations of their associated convex potential ψµ . The structure of Nµ is explained
by the fact that adding an affine function to a convex potential translates its Legendre trans-
form, that is (φµ + a · x)∗ = ψµ (· − a); the addition of the constant b are then canceled out by
renormalizing the respective Gibbs measures.
   We start with the following Theorem, which is a backbone to the stability results that will
follow.
Theorem 1.2. There exists a universal constant Cd depending only on the ambient dimension
such that the following holds. Given a Radon measure µ ∈ P1 (Rd ) whose barycenter lies that
the origin and dim supp µ = d, let φ̄ be a maximizer of Jµ . Then for any convex function
φ : Rd → R ∪ {+∞} it holds that
(1.10)                   distL1 (Rd ) (ϱφ∗ , Mµ ) ≤ Cd (Jµ (φ̄) − Jµ (φ))1/2 .
   In addition, assuming that µ has finite second moment, there exists λ ∈ [1/4, 1/2] such that,
          def.             def.
setting v = φ̄ − φ and φλ = φ̄ + λv, it holds that
(1.11)                    distL1 (µλ ) (φ, Nµ ) ≤ Cd (Jµ (φ̄) − Jµ (φ))1/2 ,
where µλ = µφ∗λ is the moment measure associated with the interpolation (φλ )∗ .
   This result may be regarded as a Polyak-Łojasiewicz type inequality for the functional Jµ , as
estimate (1.11) gives a way of using this functional to measure the distance of any φ to the class of
maximizers of Jµ . Estimate (1.10) relates the invariance of the moment measure representation
6                          JOÃO MIGUEL MACHADO AND JOÃO P. G. RAMOS

with respect to translations to the equality cases in the Prékopa-Leindler inequality, estimating
the distance of ϱφ∗ to the set of minimizers of Eµ . On the other hand, (1.11) is proved by
establishing a connection between the equality case of the Brascamp-Lieb inequality and the
invariance of the functional Jµ with respect to the addition of affine functions, being therefore
related to the stability of the Brascamp-Lieb inequality. In Example 4.2, we also discuss how
the exponent 1/2 is sharp.
   In fact, the second variation of the functional Jµ is shown to be associated with the deficit
of the Brascamp-Lieb inequality in Lemma 2.5. There is a very delicate literature around even
the first variation of this functional, see the discussion from [Rot22, Rot23]and the references
therein. For our purposes we only require variations along convex interpolations, but even in
this case rigorous on the second variation are unknown to the authors. We manage to establish
a second variation formula when one of the end points is strongly convex, which is enough to
prove (1.11) via an approximation argument that is also used in the proof of the quantitative
stability of the Brascamp-Lieb inequality itself, further strengthening the connection between
these two problems.
   In spite of the fact that Theorem 1.2 provides us, by itself, with a novel quantitative way
to show that almost maximizers of the functionals Jµ and Eµ must be close to the original
potentials, we then exploit these properties to study the quantitative stability for the moment
measure problem.
1.3. Applications. We illustrate the scope of our stability theory in three settings: compact
domains, quadratic regularization, and the whole space, highlighting how Theorems 1.1 and 1.2
can be utilized in order to deduce many further novel results about the stability of moment
measures. These results are, in a sense, similar in spirit to the results of [DM23] with respect to
the stability of Brenier maps.
Stability in a compact domain. Using Theorem 1.2, we are able to obtain several quantitative
stability results for moment measures in different contexts. When the moment measure and the
associated Gibbs measure in (1.5) are restricted to a compact domain we obtain a strong stability
result controlling the L1 distances between ϱµ , ϱν and φµ , φν with the 1-Wasserstein distance of
µ, ν; this is the content of the next result.
Theorem 1.3. Let Ω be a convex and compact subset of Rd . Given two Radon measures
µ, ν ∈ P(Ω) whose barycenters lie at the origin and dim supp µ = dim supp ν = d, let φµ , φν be
maximizers of Jµ,Ω , Jν,Ω respectively. Then, there exists a universal constant Cd,Ω depending
only on the dimension and on the diameter of Ω such that
(1.12)                 inf      ϱφ∗µ (·) − ϱφ∗ν (· + x0 )              ≤ Cd,Ω W1 (µ, ν)1/2
                      x0 ∈Rd                                L1 (Rd )

and
(1.13)               inf       ∥(φµ − φν ) − (a · x + b)∥L1 (µλ ) ≤ Cd,Ω W1 (µ, ν)1/2 ,
                  a∈Rd , b∈R

where µλ = µψλ is the moment measure of ψλ = ((1 − λ)φµ + λφν )∗ for some λ ∈ (0, 1).
  In spite of the fact that compactness allows for a fairly simpler mathematical structure, di-
verging from the objects described by the existence theorem by [CEK15, San16], we remark that
such a result means a remarkable control especially for numerical applications, as we are able
to control a strong norm with a distance which metrizes a fairly weak convergence of Radon
measures; see Section 2.1 for more details on these topologies.
Rates of convergence for quadratic regularization. The classical definition of moment measures
from (1.5) has strong motivations from convex and toric geometry [BB13], but variations thereof
have recently found several applications to sampling and generative models [VBC25]. For such
applications, the essential property of moment measures is their capacity of representing a given
                   QUANTITATIVE STABILITY FOR BL AND MOMENT MEASURES                             7

measure via the pushforward of a log-concave distribution through the gradient of the same con-
