                                            ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER


                                                                                              CHRISTIAN KREMER



                                                        Abstract. We solve the Nielsen realisation problem for high-dimensional aspherical manifolds in a




arXiv:2608.30620v1 [math.GT] 31 Aug 2026
                                                        new class of special cases. Mainly, we focus on actions of cyclic groups of prime order. A novelty is
                                                        that it gives topological solutions to the problem with certain high-dimensional fixed point sets, whereas
                                                        previous solutions of this type were restricted to discrete fixed point sets. This is enabled by recent joint
                                                        work with Kirstein on isovariant Poincaré duality spaces, and Farrell–Lück–Steimle’s obstruction theory
                                                        to finding approximate fibrations within a homotopy class.



                                                                                                  1. Introduction
                                              Nielsen realisation problems in manifold theory are about refining symmetries of manifolds to
                                           stronger symmetries. Jakob Nielsen [Nie32] originally asked if a finite subgroup of the mapping class
                                           group of a surface can be refined to a group action. For example, if f is a selfmap of a surface Σg
                                           with f p homotopic to the identity, is it homotopic to a homeomorphism of order p? There are various
                                           ways to generalise Nielsen’s problem to other classes of manifolds M . This article focuses on a gen-
                                           eralisation for aspherical manifolds: closed, connected manifolds with contractible universal cover.
                                           Examples of aspherical manifolds are closed Riemannian manifolds of nonpositive sectional curva-
                                           ture, by the celebrated Cartan–Hadamard theorem. To formulate a version of the Nielsen realisation
                                           problem, let us write the outer automorphism group of a discrete group π by Out(π). If M is an
                                           aspherical manifold, then Out(π1 (M )) is identified with the group of homotopy classes of homotopy
                                           automorphisms of M . Hence, subgroups of Out(π1 (M )) encode symmetries of M in a weak sense.

                                           Question A. Let M be a closed aspherical manifold, such that its fundamental group π has trivial centre.
                                           When can a finite subgroup

                                           (1)                                                        G ⊂ Out(π)

                                           be refined to a G-action by homeomorphisms on M ?

                                               The triviality of the centre of π guarantees that G ⊂ Out(π1 (M )) refines to an E1 -action of G on
                                           M , i.e. a map BG → BhAut(M ). See e.g. [Kre25, p.3] for an elaboration. In particular, this allows us
                                           to speak of the homotopy fixed points M hG of the action. We give a purely group-theoretic description
                                           of this space below (2). Previous topological approaches to Question A, for example [DL24], relied on
                                           these homotopy fixed points to be equivalent to a finite set. This article gives the first purely topological
                                           construction of solutions to the Nielsen realisation problem in the case when M hG is low-dimensional
                                           compared to the dimension of M .

                                           Theorem B. Let M d be an oriented aspherical d-manifold with π = π1 (M ) word-hyperbolic and d at
                                           least six. Consider a cyclic subgroup Cp ⊂ Out(π) of odd prime order p. If the space M hCp is homotopy
                                           equivalent to a PL-manifold of dimension at most (d − 2)/2, then it refines to a Cp -action on M .

                                                 Date: September 1, 2026.
                                                                                                             1
                     ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                   2


    The generalised Nielsen realisation problem (Question A) has attracted some interest in the liter-
ature. In [RS77], the importance of the triviality of the centre of π was first discovered, see [Kre25]
for an elaboration. The article [BW08] gives counterexamples for G being a cyclic group of order 2.
Lastly, there are some uniqueness and non-uniqueness results for solutions to the Nielsen realisation
problem [CDK14; CDK15].
    In fact, the action of Cp on M we produce satisfies a special property: It is Borel in the sense that
the map M Cp → M hCp is an equivalence. This design criterion is attractive for the following reason:
Let O := π1 (MhCp ) denote the orbifold fundamental group of (M, Cp ⊂ Out(π)) (see §2). That the
action of Cp on M produced by Theorem B is Borel guarantees that M is equivariantly homotopy
equivalent to the quotient π\Efin O with its residual Cp -action. Here, Efin O is the universal space for
the family of finite subgroups of O. Given a Borel Cp -action on M as produced by Theorem B, the
group O acts on the universal cover M   f, exhibiting a cocompact manifold model for Efin O.
    The space M   hCp
                       can be identified explicitly in terms of the group O. We show in Lemma A.4 that
                                                      a
(2)                                       M hCp ≃          BWO F.
                                                    F ∈M

Here, M is a set of representatives of the nontrivial finite subgroups of O up to conjugation. The
group WO F = NO F/F is the Weyl group of F in O. The condition in Theorem B can hence be
read as a condition on the Weyl groups of finite subgroups of the orbifold fundamental group O. For
example, if the normalisers of nontrivial finite subgroups of O are virtually cyclic, (2) identifies M hCp
as a disjoint union of circles and points. We also mention that the indexing set M is a finite set, since
a word-hyperbolic group has only finitely many conjugacy classes of finite subgroups [BH99, Thm.
III.Γ.3.2.]. The formula (2) can also be used to see that it is in general not guaranteed for M hCp to be
homotopy equivalent to a closed manifold, see [FL04].

Outline of the proof of Theorem B. The proof of Theorem B relies on equivariant and isovariant
Poincaré duality, two tools designed to describe facets of the homotopy theory of manifolds with a
group action. Write XBor := π\Efin O (see §2 for an explanation of the notation).
      (a) Equivariant and isovariant Poincaré duality provide the structure of a finite semifree isovariant
          Cp -Poincaré space on XBor . That is, a decomposition of XBor as a pushout of finite Cp -spaces

                                              ∂C            C
(3)
                                               C
                                               p
                                             XBor          XBor

          satisfying some geometric properties. Among those properties is that the action on Cp and
          ∂Cp is free, and that (Q, ∂Q) = Cp \(C, ∂C) is a Poincaré duality pair. Here, the codimension
          assumption in Theorem B is used. Intuitively (3) resembles the decomposition of a smooth
          Cp -manifold M into its fixed point set M Cp , the free part M \ M Cp and that they glue to M
          along the unit sphere bundle of the normal bundle of the fixed point set [KK25, Constr. 1.2].
      (b) We use non-equivariant surgery theory for topological manifolds, in particular Ranicki’s total
          surgery obstruction to show that the pair (Q, ∂Q) is equivalent to a compact manifold pair
          (N, ∂N ). The essential method here is a computation involving the K-and L-theoretic Farrell–
          Jones conjecture. This is one step where the hyperbolicity assumption on π is used.
                                     Cp
      (c) Picking an equivalence XBor    ≃ L, where L is a PL-manifold, we want to glue it to the Cp -
          cover N of N to obtain a manifold with Cp -action. For this, we use the technique of manifold
          approximate fibrations: the teardrop construction allows us to build a topology on the Cp -set
                   ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                   3


        (N \ ∂N ) ∪ L giving a Cp -manifold M ′ . As a last step, one shows that M is homeomorphic
        to M ′ , compatible with the outer actions on the fundamental group.
   Before moving on to how steps (a), (b) and (c) are carried out in this article specifically, we mention
that also outside applications to the Nielsen realisation problem it presents a useful pipeline to con-
struct Cp -actions on topological manifolds. First, one uses equivariant and isovariant Poincaré duality
to separate the problem into the fixed point set part and the free part. Then one uses non-equivariant
surgery to construct manifold structures on the free and fixed part separately. Finally, the theory of
approximate fibrations is used to glue fixed part and free part back together.
   Step (a) relies on and motivated the equivariant Poincaré duality developed in [HKK24b; HKK24a]
and on the theory of their isovariant structures built in [KK25]. The work [Lüc] is a precursor to these
techniques, and heavily inspired them.
   Step (b) is mostly computational, partially generalising and streamlining computations in [DL24]
involving Farrell–Jones assembly maps. In contrast to [DL24] our presentation consequently uses
the modern setup of hermitian K-theory developed in [CDH+23; CDH+25], which might make the
results therein accessible to a broader audience. We note some additional results made in the proof of
this step below.
   Step (c) is vastly simpler in the setting of discrete fixed points, than in our generality. Roughly, in
the setting of discrete fixed points, the boundary ∂N will consist of spheres with a certain group ac-
tion, and one can extend these group actions over a disc to obtain a group action on a closed manifold,
which will in fact give the desired solution to the Nielsen realisation problem. For high-dimensional
fixed points, it is not true in general that the map ∂N → L is homotopic to an equivariant sphere
bundle projection, so we cannot glue N to L by gluing in a disc bundle. So we use the technique of
manifold approximate fibrations and the teardrop construction from [HTW+00] to deal with this glu-
ing construction. Since this technique is not broadly used, §5 might be of some independent interest
for readers interested in constructing group actions on topological manifolds. We use the K-theoretic
obstruction theory to deform maps into approximate fibrations from [FLS18]. As this obstruction
theory is only developed over PL-manifolds, we need the PL-assumption in Theorem B.
1.1. Additional results. In showing the existence of a manifold structure on the complement quo-
tient (Q, ∂Q) (i.e. the pair Cp \(C, ∂C) in (3)) we prove some results on algebraic K-theory and Block
homeomorphism groups that might be of independent interest. We start with the relevant K-theoretic
results. Let G be a finite group, and π a torsionfree group. Fix an extension
(4)                                     1 → π → Γ → G → 1.
A subgroup F ⊂ Γ is called full if the composite F ⊂ Γ → G is an isomorphism. Write M for a
set of representatives of conjugacy classes of full subgroups. We assume that each nontrivial finite
subgroup of Γ is contained in a unique full subgroup. See Lemma A.2 for alternative characterisations
of this property. The Whitehead group Wh(Γ) of Γ is relevant to the theory of s-cobordisms, and
the reduced projective class group K(ZΓ) of ZΓ to Wall’s finiteness obstruction or Siebenmann’s end
theorem.
Theorem C. If Γ is a Farrell–Jones group as above, then the inclusions NΓ F ⊂ Γ of normalisers of full
subgroups of Γ induce isomorphisms
                                  ≃                                     ≃ e
                 M                                    M
(5)                   Wh(NΓ F ) − → Wh(Γ) and              e 0 (ZNΓ F ) −
                                                           K            → K0 (ZΓ).
                 F ∈M                                   F ∈M

   Examples of Farrell–Jones groups are word-hyperbolic groups or fundamental groups of non-
positively curved manifolds, and finite extensions of such. Having this in mind, we give an ap-
plication of our results to the study of block homeomorphism groups. Let M be a nonpositively
                   ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                  4


curved closed manifold with an isometric action by the finite group G of odd order. Assume that
the action is semifree and smooth, so only G and the trivial group occur as isotropy groups. We
let (N , ∂N ) denote the complement of an equivariant tubular neighborhood of M G in M , and set
(N, ∂N ) = G\(N , ∂N ). For these specific manifolds we get the following result for its group of
block homeomorphisms.

Theorem D. For M as above, if dim M ≥ 6 and M G ⊂ M has codimension at least 3, the map

(6)                               Homeo(N,
                                  ^        ∂N ) → hAut(N, ∂N )
is an inclusion of path components onto the group of simple homotopy automorphisms.

    The left hand side of (6) denotes the group of block homeomorphisms of N respecting (but not
fixing) the boundary, and the right hand side homotopy automorphisms of the pair (N ∂N ). A ho-
motopy automorphism (f, ∂f ) : (N, ∂N ) → (N, ∂N ) is simple if the maps f and ∂f are simple
homotopy equivalences. Theorem D resembles the conclusion of the Block Borel conjecture for block
homeomorphisms of aspherical manifolds. We view it as interesting, since most results for block
homeomorphism groups of manifolds are known for manifolds with torsionfree fundamental group.
See [HLL+21] for more information about the Block Borel conjecture, including its relevance to the
vanishing results of characteristic classes.

1.2. Recent literature on coherent actions. We mention some recent work on the theory of co-
herent actions on manifolds. If M is a closed topological (resp. smooth) manifold and G a com-
pact Lie group, a coherent action on M by homeomorphisms (resp. diffeomorphisms) is a map
α : BG → BHomeo(M ) (resp. BDiff). Following Reinhold, we call such an action kinetic if it
comes from an actual (smooth) G-action on M . Reinhold [Rei19] constructed non-kinetic smooth
actions of the group SU(2) on high-dimensional manifolds, and recently Krannich–Randal-Williams
constructed some examples of non-kinetic coherent actions by finite groups [KR26]. The latter was
inspired by a construction of Kang–Park–Taniguchi [KPT26a], who also gave a similar construction
in dimension four [KPT26b]. In the results of this article, we start with a high-dimensional aspherical
manifold M with hyperbolic fundamental group and a map

(7)                             BCp → BhAut(M ) ≃ B Homeo(M
                                                    ^       )
and lift it to an actual group action under the conditions of Theorem B. It would be interesting to in-
vestigate the relation of the theory of coherent actions with the methods used in this article, including
equivariant or isovariant Poincaré duality, and equivariant surgery.

1.3. Conventions. We freely use the language of ∞-categories as developed by Joyal and Lurie. The
term category is used for an ∞-category. We write S for the category of spaces, and Sp for the category
of spectra. The term compact is used in its categorical meaning, so a compact space is a G-space of the
homotopy type of a finitely dominated G-CW complex. The exception being that “compact manifold”
is used for a manifold which is covering-compact. We sometimes write e for the trivial group, so if X
is a G-space the notation X e refers to fixed points of the trivial group, i.e. the underlying space. For
a discrete group Γ and F ⊂ Γ a subgroup, we write NΓ F for its normaliser and WΓ F = NΓ F/F for
its Weyl group.

1.4. Acknowledgements. I thank my advisor Wolfgang Lück for introducing me to the Nielsen re-
alisation problem; this article is part of my PhD thesis. Further thanks go to Dominik Kirstein and Kaif
Hilman for exploring equivariant Poincaré duality with me, which was crucial for this project. I thank
Shmuel Weinberger for pointing out the relevance of approximate fibrations for equivariant manifold
                     ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                 5


theory to me, and Andrea Bianchi, Emma Brink, Branko Juran, Markus Land as well as Marco Volpe
for helpful conversations.


                                                Contents
      1. Introduction                                                                                   1
      Outline of the proof of Theorem B                                                                 2
      1.1. Additional results                                                                           3
      1.2. Recent literature on coherent actions                                                        4
      1.3. Conventions                                                                                  4
      1.4. Acknowledgements                                                                             4
      2. Setup and decompositions from equivariant Poincaré duality                                    5
      2.1. Good decompositions and isovariant Poincaré spaces                                          6
      2.2. Finiteness                                                                                   7
      2.3. Existence of finite isovariant structures for XBor                                           8
      3. Surgery-theoretic preliminaries                                                                8
      3.1. K- and L-theory                                                                              8
      3.2. L-theory with transfers                                                                     10
      3.3. L-theory for pairs of spaces and structure spectra                                          11
      3.4. Total surgery obstructions                                                                  13
      4. Structure spectra of fixed-point complements                                                  14
      4.1. Outline and first observations                                                              15
      4.2. Davis–Lück assembly and the Farrell–Jones conjecture                                       15
      4.3. L-theoretic computations                                                                    18
      4.4. K-theory                                                                                    19
      4.5. The structure spectrum assembly map and injectivity of the transfer                         22
      5. Gluing                                                                                        24
      5.1. Manifold approximate fibrations and teardrop neighborhoods                                  24
      5.2. K-theoretic obstructions to approximate fibering                                            25
      6. The main theorem                                                                              26
      6.1. Manifold structures on the complement                                                       26
      6.2. Putting together                                                                            27
      Appendix A. Group theory                                                                         29
      Appendix B. Pairs of spaces with transfers                                                       31
      References                                                                                       33




                 2. Setup and decompositions from eqivariant Poincaré duality
    In this subsection, we recall some results from equivariant and isovariant Poincaré duality that are
crucial in the proof of Theorem B. Let G be a finite group. For the purpose of our main theorem, G will
be Cp , but for most of the article there is no reason to make this restriction on the generality. A space
is aspherical if it is connected and has contractible universal cover. Assume that X is an aspherical
space with fundamental group π, so that X ≃ Bπ. Let α : G → hAut(X) be a map of E1 -groups.
This can equivalently be encoded by an extension of discrete groups

(8)                                      1 → π → O → G → 1.
                    ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                 6


Indeed, given α, we can set O := π1 (XhG ) to be the orbifold fundamental group of the action. The
fibre sequence X → XhG → BG induces the extension (8) on fundamental groups. Conversely, in (8)
we can pass to classifying spaces to get a map BO → BG with fibre Bπ, exhibiting a G-action on Bπ
by fibre transport. As mentioned in the introduction, if π has trivial centre, the E1 -group hAut(X)
is equivalent to the discrete group Out(π). Hence, in this case the extension above can be recovered
from the pair (X, G ⊂ Out(π)).
    We write XBor for the quotient π\Efin O. Viewing X ∈ S BG as a space with G-action, XBor is
the image of X under the right adjoint of the restriction SG → S BG , see [Kre25]. This right adjoint
is fully faithful with image the Borel G-spaces, whence the name.
    The main results of this section are about decompositions of XBor needed in the rest of the article.
                                                                                        Cp
Crucially, to prove Theorem B we will have to decompose XBor into its fixed part XBor      and a com-
plement C, intuitively thought of as the complement M \ M of the fixed points for a manifold M
                                                              Cp

with Cp -action. This decomposition is additional data on XBor and might not exist in general.
2.1. Good decompositions and isovariant Poincaré spaces. In this subsection we define good
decompositions of G-spaces X as a weaker version of semifree isovariant G-Poincaré spaces that we
encounter thereafter. The reader should think of the free-fixed decomposition of a smooth semifree
G-manifold, see [KK25, Constr. 1.2].
   Recall that a map f : A → X of spaces is a π–π-equivalence if it induces an equivalence on 1-
truncations. Equivalently, the map π0 f : π0 A → π0 X is a bijection, and for each choice of basepoint
a ∈ A the map π1 (f, a) : π1 (A, a) → π1 (X, f (x)) on fundamental groups is an equivalence.
Definition 2.1.1. A good decomposition of a compact G-space X is a pushout square
                                              ∂C           C
(9)                                             p

                                                    incl
                                             XG            X
satisfying the following conditions.
      (1) The G-action on C and ∂C is free.
      (2) The pair (C e , ∂C e ) is a Poincaré duality pair.
      (3) The map ∂C e → X G is a π–π-equivalence.
      (4) For x ∈ X G , the fibre {x} ×X G ∂C is a compact G-space.
A good decomposition of X is finite if all the spaces occurring in (9) are finite G-spaces.
Remark 2.1.2. If X admits a good decomposition, and e ̸= H ⊂ G is any subgroup, then the map
X G → X H is an equivalence. In other words, X is a semifree G-space. The main results of this article
are for the group Cp , where this condition is vacuous.
Definition 2.1.3. Given a good decomposition of a compact G-space X as in (9), we call (C, ∂C) the
complement (of X G in X) and (Q, ∂Q) := G\(C, ∂C) the complement-quotient.
    One part of this article is about showing that given a good decomposition for XBor as in (9), there
is a compact manifold pair equivalent to the pair (Q, ∂Q) := G\(C, ∂C). Or equivalently, there
is a compact manifold pair (N , ∂N ) within the G-homotopy type (C, ∂C). But to find a closed G-
manifold within the G-homotopy type XBor , we actually need the following stronger notion.
Definition 2.1.4 ([KK25], Def. 2.3.4.). A compact G-space X with a good decomposition as in (9) is
a semifree isovariant G-Poincaré duality space if X G is a Poincaré duality space, and for each x ∈ X G
the fibre ∂C e ×X G {x} is equivalent to a sphere S l of some dimension l. If the good decomposition
of X is additionally finite, it is called a finite isovariant G-Poincaré duality space.
                      ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                7


2.2. Finiteness. The homotopy types of compact manifolds are finite spaces, i.e. spaces admitting a
finite cell structure. Given a G-space with a good decomposition (3), checking finiteness of C and ∂C
as G-spaces is a first obstruction to finding a compact G-manifold pair (N , ∂N ) in the G-homotopy
type (C, ∂C).
Recollections 2.2.1. If X is a compact Cp -space with free action and X e ≃ S l for some l, then
Cp \X is even finite, because it is equivalent to some lens space. See [Nic24, Sec. 2.3] for more groups
with similar properties, e.g. also a compact free SL2 (Fp )-space X with X e ≃ S l has the property
that G\X is finite for p ≥ 3.
Lemma 2.2.2. Let consider a compact G-space X with a good decomposition
                                               ∂C             C
(10)                                           p                   p′

                                               XG             X.
Then:
       (1) Finiteness of C is implied by finiteness of X and ∂C.
       (2) If G = Cp and the square is a G-isovariant Poincaré space, then finiteness of ∂C is implied by
           finiteness of X G .
Recollections 2.2.3. To prove Lemma 2.2.2, we use Lück’s equivariant finiteness obstruction, a gen-
eralisation of Wall’s K-theoretic finiteness obstruction [Lüc89, Sec. 14]. Let Ab denote the category
of abelian groups. There is a functor
                                            WaG (−) : SG → Ab.
Whenever X is a compact G-space, there is a well-defined element w(X) ∈ WaG (X), which vanishes
exactly if X has the homotopy type of a finite G-CW complex. The element w(X) ∈ WaG (X) is called
the equivariant finiteness obstruction of X. Given a pushout of compact G-spaces
                                                X             X′
(11)                                                      h
                                                               i
                                                      j
                                                Y             Y′
the equivariant finiteness obstructions satisfy the sum formula
(12)                 w(Y ′ ) = WaG (i)(w(X ′ )) + WaG (j)(w(Y )) − WaG (h)(w(X)).
If X is compact, Lück constructs [Lüc89, Thm. 14.46] an explicit natural isomorphism
                                                      ≃
                                   M
(13)                                    K     H
                                        e 0 (XhW
                                                 GH
                                                    )−→ WaG (X).
                                      (H)

Here, the indexing set is a set of representatives of conjugacy classes of subgroups of G.
Proof of Lemma 2.2.2. For the first part, we have to show that finiteness of X and ∂C implies finiteness
of C. From the sum formula for the equivariant finiteness obstruction, we see that the image of
w(C) ∈ WaG (C) in WaG (X) is zero. Hence, we have to argue that the map
(14)                                 WaG (p′ ) : WaG (C) → WaG (X)
is injective. From the natural isomorphism (13), it suffices to show that K            e 0 (X e ) is in-
                                                                          e 0 (C e ) → K
                                                                                hG           hG
jective. But this map is even an isomorphism: since ∂C e → X G is a π–π-equivalence, so is C e → X e ,
and K e 0 (−) inverts π–π-equivalences. To prove the second assertion, note that by Recollection 2.2.1
the space ∂Q = Cp \∂C e can be obtained as a colimit over the finite complex X G of finite complexes,
and hence is itself finite.                                                                           □
                    ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                    8


2.3. Existence of finite isovariant structures for XBor . In this subsection, we give the main ex-
istence theorem on additional structure for XBor that we use to prove Theorem B.

Theorem 2.3.1. Suppose given an aspherical manifold M d with word-hyperbolic fundamental group
π, and a subgroup Cp ⊂ Out(π). Assume that M hCp is a Poincaré duality space of dimension at most
(d − 2)/2. Then the associated Cp -space XBor admits the structure of a finite isovariant Cp -Poincaré
space.

Proof. In [KK25], it was proven that XBor admits the structure of an isovariant Cp -Poincaré space,
and we check that it is indeed finite. The orbifold fundamental group O = π1 MhCp is again word-
hyperbolic, since it is commensurable to π. A Rips complex of O presents a finite cell structure
on Efin O. Since XBor ≃ π\Efin O we conclude that XBor is a finite Cp -space. This implies that
  Cp
XBor  ≃ M hCp is finite as well. Now Lemma 2.2.2 implies that every isovariant structure on XBor is
indeed finite.                                                                                    □

Remark 2.3.2. The quoted results of [KK25] rely on [HKK24a], which was only written in the general-
ity of cyclic groups of prime order. It seems plausible that the results of [HKK24a] can be generalised,
extending the validity of Theorem 2.3.1. To account for this possibility, we often require a good de-
composition (or isovariant structure, etc.) of XBor as a datum instead of making the assumptions of
Theorem B and citing Theorem 2.3.1 in the rest of this article.

                                 3. Surgery-theoretic preliminaries
   In this preliminary section, we recall algebraic K- and L-theory in the framework of Poincaré
categories introduced in [CDH+23]. We give a construction of the Poincaré category relevant to the
total surgery obstruction. This Poincaré category is constructed covariantly functorial in maps of pairs
of spaces, and contravariantly functorial in covering maps. We review the total surgery obstruction
of a Poincaré duality pair, whose vanishing we want to verify in our special case in order to prove
Theorem B.

3.1. K- and L-theory. We use the theory of Poincaré categories as developed in the series [CDH+23;
CDH+25]. Write Catp for the category of Poincaré categories, which are pairs
                                              (C, Ϙ) ∈ Catp
with C a stable category and Ϙ : C op → Sp a perfect quadratic functor. There is a functor Pn : Catp →
S assigning to a Poincaré category its space of Poincaré objects. Intuitively: a Poincaré category (C, Ϙ)
is a category of algebraic objects C and a type of forms Ϙ. A Poincaré object is a pair (x, q) where
x ∈ C is an object, and q ∈ Ϙ(x) is a “non-degenerate form of type Ϙ” on it. For a ring R, write
ModfR for the smallest stable subcategory of the (derived) module (∞–)category ModR generated by
R. Objects in ModfR are called finite R-modules.

Example 3.1.1. There is a Poincaré category given by the pair (ModfZ , Ϙq ) where Ϙq is the functor
                                      Ϙq (x) := hom(x ⊗ x, Z)hC2 .
A Poincaré object in (ModfZ , Ϙq ) is a finite Z-module x carrying a non-degenerate quadratic form.

   Ranicki’s work on algebraic surgery and the subsequent redevelopment and generalisation in
[CDH+23; CDH+25] identifies many objects encountered in surgery theory in terms of Poincaré-
Verdier invariants of Poincaré categories. We recall a few such invariants here to fix our notation
for the rest of the article.
                      ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                9


       (1) Connective algebraic K-theory is a functor
                                        k : Catp → SpBC
                                                     ≥0 ⊂ Sp
                                                       2    BC2


           which receives a natural transformation Pn → Ω∞ k(−)hC2 .
       (2) Non-connective algebraic K-theory is a functor
                                             K : Catp → SpBC2
           which comes with a natural transformation k → K. This natural transformation does not
           become an equivalence when postcomposed with the connective cover functor τ≥0 . However,
           it does induce an equivalence τ≥1 k → τ≥1 K.
       (3) Postcomposing the map k → K with the Tate fixed-point functor (−)tC2 gives rise to two
           new Poincaré-Verdier invariants and a comparison map between them
                                       ktC2 → KtC2 : Catp → Sp.
                                                    

       (4) Algebraic L-theory is a functor
                                               L : Catp → Sp
           which serves as a broad generalisation and refinement of Wall’s L-groups of rings with an
           anti-involution. In special cases, its homotopy groups capture invariants of symmetric bilinear
           or quadratic forms, and as such occur as obstruction groups in surgery theory.
       (5) Karoubi-invariant algebraic L-theory is a functor
                                               L : Catp → Sp.
          It comes with a natural transformation L → L which can be described by a universal prop-
          erty: while algebraic L-theory does not invert Karoubi equivalences [CDH+25, Def. 1.3.1.],
          Karoubi-invariant algebraic L-theory does, and this transformation exhibits it as the ini-
          tial Karoubi-invariant approximation of algebraic L-theory from the right among Poincaré-
          Verdier invariants.
Our computational goal can be stated purely in terms of algebraic L-theory. However, Karoubi-
invariant algebraic L-theory has significant computational advantages over its non–Karoubi-
invariant counterpart, such as the Farrell–Jones conjecture as we recall in §4.2. Algebraic K-theory
and its non-connective counterpart will primarily be used to get computational access to the difference
of L and L. The following result is from the forthcoming article [CDH+].

Proposition 3.1.2. The natural transformations L → L and ktC2 → KtC2 fit into a commuting square

                                               L          ktC2
(15)

                                               L         KtC2
which induces a pullback of spectra when evaluated at any Poincaré category (C, Ϙ).

   We also recall the notion of metabolic Poincaré categories and bordism invariant Poincaré-Verdier
invariants for later use. Recall from [CDH+23, Sec. 2.3.] the metabolic construction
                              Met : Catp → Catp ,      (C, Ϙ) 7→ (Ar(C), Ϙmet ).
Here, Ar(C) is the arrow category of C, and Ϙmet (w → x) := fib(Ϙ(x) → Ϙ(w)). There is a Poincaré
functor met : Met(C, Ϙ) → (C, Ϙ), which on objects extracts the target of an arrow w → x. Poincaré
objects in Met(C, Ϙ) admit an interpretation in terms of Lagrangians of forms. Examples of such
Lagrangians are provided by nullbordisms of manifolds [CDH+23, Ex. 2.3.4.].
                      ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                  10


Observation 3.1.3. By [CDH+23, Rmk. 7.3.21], the Poincaré functor met is an adjunction counit, with
the right adjoint being the forgetful functor from Poincaré categories to hermitian categories. This
forgetful functor commutes with colimits [CDH+23, Prop. 6.1.4.], so Met is colimit-preserving.
   A Poincaré-Verdier invariant is called bordism invariant if it vanishes on Met(C, Ϙ) for every
Poincaré category (C, Ϙ) ∈ Catp . See [CDH+25, Lem. 3.5.6.] for a few equivalent characterisations.
Proposition 3.1.4. The Poincaré-Verdier functors L, L, ktC2 and KtC2 are bordism invariant.
Proof. This is [CDH+25, Cor. 4.4.6.] for L, [CDH+25, Ex. 3.3.6.(i)] for ktC2 and KtC2 , and in the
upcoming article [CDH+] for L.                                                                  □
3.2. L-theory with transfers. The category Catp of Poincaré categories has small limits and col-
imits [CDH+23, Prop. 6.1.4.]. Given a space X ∈ S and a Poincaré category (C, Ϙ), we write (C.Ϙ)X
for the colimit of the constant X-shaped diagram with value (C, Ϙ). This construction is evidently
covariantly functorial in X. In the following, we describe a related construction for pairs of spaces
and functoriality in finite sheeted covering maps.
   Given a pair of spaces (X, A) and (C, Ϙ) ∈ Catp , we define (C, Ϙ)(X,A) as a pullback in Catp .

                                     (C, Ϙ)(X,A)         Met((C, ΣϘ)X )
(16)                                                               met

                                      (C, ΣϘ)A                (C, ΣϘ)X
Since the formation of Poincaré objects commutes with pullbacks, we may view Poincaré objects
in (C, Ϙ)(X,A) as a Poincaré object in (C, ΣϘ)A together with a nullbordism of its pushforward to
(C, ΣϘ)X . Intuitively, it resembles a class in the relative bordism group Ω∗ (X, A). We make the
following observations.
       (1) Since the right vertical morphism in the pullback (16) is a split Poincaré-Verdier projection
           ([CDH+25, Ex. 1.2.5.]), the square is a split Poincaré-Verdier square ([CDH+25, Rem. 1.6.2.iii]).
       (2) In particular, since L-theory is bordism invariant the square (16) induces a fibre sequence
                                L((C, Ϙ)A ) → L((C, Ϙ)X ) → L((C, Ϙ)(X,A) ).
           An analogous observation holds for the functors L, ktC2 and KtC2 .
       (3) The construction is covariantly functorial in (X, A) ∈ S 2 .
    In the following, we extend the functoriality of the construction (16) to backwards-functoriality
in finite covering maps. Write S 2 := Fun(∆1 , S) for the category of pairs of spaces. A map
p : (Y, ∂Y ) → (X, ∂X) is a finite covering of pairs if the square
                                                  ∂Y          Y
(17)
                                                  ∂X          X
is cartesian and both vertical maps are covering maps. Using the notation of Appendix B, we define
the category of pairs of spaces with transfers as the category of correspondences
                                        Stf2 := Corr(S 2 , fincov, all).
Objects in Stf2 are pairs of spaces, and morphisms are those correspondences
                                 (E, ∂E)
(18)                       p                  f
                                                              ∈ mapCorr(S 2 ) ((X, ∂X), (Y, ∂Y ))

               (X, ∂X)                             (Y, ∂Y )
                   ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                  11


for which p is a finite-sheeted covering map of pairs of spaces. Composition is defined by taking
pullbacks of correspondences, which is well-defined since the class of finite coverings of pairs is stable
under pullbacks.
Construction 3.2.1. Let J = (∗ → ∗ ← ∗) denote the free cospan . The category Fun(J , Catp ) is
semiadditive and cocomplete. Note that assigning to (X, A) ∈ S 2 the span (C, ΣϘ)A → (C, ΣϘ)X ←
Met((C, ΣϘ)X ) is a colimit preserving functor in (X, A). Hence, by Proposition B.1 it uniquely ex-
tends to a functor u : Stf2 → Fun(J , Catp ). The functor
(19)                                     (C, Ϙ)(−) : Stf2 → Catp
is the composite of the functor u with the pullback functor Fun(J , Catp ) → Catp . Note that the
restriction of this functor to S 2 recovers the functor written in (16).
3.3. L-theory for pairs of spaces and structure spectra. Next, we introduce the main example of
a Poincaré category that we concern ourselves with.
Definition 3.3.1. Let (X, A) be a pair of spaces. Its quadratic L-theory is the spectrum
                                   Lq (X, A) = L((ModfZ , Ϙq )(X,A) ).
It defines a functor Lq : Stf2 → Sp. We abbreviate Lq (X) := Lq (X, ∅). Analogous constructions with
L, ktC2 , KtC2 define functors Lq , ktC2 , KtC2 : Stf2 → Sp.
   Note that, as discussed in §3.2, Lq (X, A) is the cofiber of the map Lq (A) → Lq (X) induced by the
functoriality of Lq (−). Further, for a discrete group Γ, Lq (BΓ) = L(ModfZΓ , Ϙq ) [LNS23, p. 1489].
Remark 3.3.2. See [CDH+23, Cor. 4.4.12] for a discussion relating the present definition of quadratic
L-theory to previously considered definitions. In [CDH+26, Sec. 1.2] the authors derive a presentation
of the homotopy groups of quadratic L-theory that is akin to Wall’s original definition [Wal99]. This is
achieved by adapting Ranicki’s algebraic surgery to the setting of Poincaré categories. Wall originally
defined quadratic L-groups for a groupoid instead of a space. From our perspective, this is explained
by the following important property of quadratic L-theory.
Proposition 3.3.3 (The algebraic π–π-theorem, [CDH+26] Cor. 1.2.33.). Suppose f : A → X is a
π–π-equivalence. Then Lq (X, A) ≃ 0.
  Our next goal is to construct the assembly maps in quadratic L-theory compatible with transfers,
and a slight variant needed to define the structure spectrum of a pair of spaces. We start by a general
construction.
Construction 3.3.4. Let E ∈ Sp be a spectrum. Using Proposition B.1 we can construct a functor
                                          E ⊗ (−) : Stf2 → Sp
by assigning the values
                               E ⊗ (∗, ∅) := E and E ⊗ (∗, ∗) := 0.
In fact, by Proposition B.2 a functor F ∈ Funcodesc (Stf2 , Sp) is of the form E ⊗ (−) if and only if
F (∗, ∗) ≃ 0, in which case F ≃ F (∗, ∅) ⊗ (−).
Definition 3.3.5. Let F ∈ Fun(Stf2 , Sp) be a functor commuting with coproducts. Assume F (∗, ∗) ≃
0. Then we write
(20)                                 asmF : F (∗) ⊗ (−) → F (−)
for the adjunction counit of the adjunction Proposition B.2, evaluated on F . We call asmF the assembly
map with transfers for the functor F .
                   ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                  12


Construction 3.3.6 (Assembly maps). Observe that Lq (−) commutes with coproducts, i.e. the map
                        Lq (X0 , A0 ) ⊕ Lq (X1 , A1 ) → Lq (X0 ∪ X1 , A0 ∪ A1 )
is an equivalence. The restriction of Lq (−) to S 2 does not commute with colimits, however. We
have shown in Proposition B.2 that the inclusion Funcodesc (Stf2 , Sp) ⊂ Fun∪ (Stf2 , Sp) admits a right
adjoint. Hence, there is a universal natural transformation
                                    asmLq : Lq (∗) ⊗ (−) → Lq (−)
whose source lies in Funcodesc (Stf2 , Sp). To justify notation, observe that the restriction of Lq to S 2
may be computed by left Kan extending the restriction of Lq (−) along ∆1 ⊂ S 2 → Stf2 back to S 2 .
We compute
        Lq (∗) := Lq (∅ → ∗) ≃ L(ModfZ , Ϙq ) and Lq (∗ → ∗) ≃ L(Met(ModfZ , Ϙq )) ≃ 0.
In general Lq (∗) ⊗ (X, A) is the cofibre of the map Lq (∗) ⊗ Σ∞
                                                               + A → L (∗) ⊗ Σ+ X. Similarly
                                                                      q       ∞

L admits such an approximation from the left written asmLq : L (∗) ⊗ (−) → L (−). The map
  q                                                             q             q

Lq (−) → Lq (−) induces a commuting square of functors
                                                    ≃
                                   Lq (∗) ⊗ (−)          Lq (∗) ⊗ (−)
(21)                                      asmLq                 asmLq

                                      Lq (−)                Lq (−)
in which the upper map is an equivalence: indeed, this follows from the map
                                     L(ModfZ , Ϙq ) → L(ModfZ , Ϙq )
being an equivalence.
  We write τ≥1 (−) for the 1-connective cover functor, viewed as an endofunctor of Sp. Note that it
comes with a map τ≥1 E → E, natural in E ∈ Sp.
Definition 3.3.7. Let (Y, A) be a pair of spaces. The algebraic structure spectrum of (Y, A) is the
spectrum
(22)          S(Y, A) := cofib ((τ≥1 Lq (∗)) ⊗ (Y, A) → Lq (∗) ⊗ (Y, A) → Lq (Y, A)) .
   We warn the reader that only if (X, ∂X) is an oriented Poincaré duality pair, the spectrum
S(X, ∂X) has a relation to compact manifold pairs in the homotopy type (X, ∂X). For non-orientable
Poincaré duality pairs, one uses a twisted version [Ran92, Appendix A]. For computational reasons,
we will also consider the following two variants. Define
Skar (Y, A) := cofib((τ≥1 Lq (∗) ⊗ (Y, A)) → Lq (Y, A))       the Karoubi structure spectrum;
        per
      Skar  (X, A) := cofib(Lq (∗) ⊗ (Y, A) → Lq (Y, A))       the periodic Karoubi structure spectrum.
                                     per
All three variants S(−), Skar (−), Skar  (−) are functorial in Stf2 .
Proposition 3.3.8. The fibres of the maps S(X, A) → Skar (X, A) and ktC2 (X, A) → KtC2 (X, A)
are equivalent, naturally in (X, A) ∈ Stf2 .
Proof. Note that from the definition of S(−) as a cofibre it comes with a natural transformaion from
Lq (−). The two squares in the diagram

                            S(X, A)            Lq (X, A)          ktC2 (X, A)
(23)

                           Skar (X, A)         Lq (X, A)          KtC2 (X, A)
                     ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER              13


induce a functorial span between the desired fibres. We argue that this span is in fact an equivalence.
To see this, we have to argue that the two squares are cartesian. The right square is cartesian by
Proposition 3.1.2. The map induced on horizontal fibres by the left square is the map (τ≥1 Lq (∗)) ⊗
(X, A) → (τ≥1 Lq (∗)) ⊗ (X, A), which is an equivalence as observed in Construction 3.3.6.           □

   Our next objective is the study of the assembly map for the functor S(−) : Stf2 → Sp. From the
definitions, we directly compute
(24)                              S(∗) ≃ τ≤0 Lq (∗) and S(∗, ∗) ≃ 0.
Observe that S(−) commutes with coproducts. Hence, we may apply Definition 3.3.5 to S(−) : Stf2 →
Sp to get a map which we call the structure spectrum assembly map
(25)                                (τ≤0 Lq (∗)) ⊗ (X, A) → S(X, A).

Lemma 3.3.9. The structure spectrum assembly map (τ≤0 Lq (∗)) ⊗ (X, A) → S(X, A) is an equiva-
lence provided (X, A) satisfies the following two conditions.
                         per
       (1) The spectrum Skar (X, A) vanishes.
       (2) The map L (X, A) → Lq (X, A) is an equivalence.
                      q


Proof. Using the identification Lq (∗) ≃ Lq (∗) we may draw the following commuting diagram.
                                                                      b
                                                  Lq (X, A)                      Lq (X, A)


(26)          τ≤0 Lq (∗) ⊗ (X, A)         a
                                                  S(X, A)                        per
                                                                                Skar (X, A)


                                                                          c
                                           Σ(τ≥1 Lq (∗)) ⊗ (X, A)             ΣLq (∗) ⊗ (X, A)

We claim that the dashed arrow and the arrow labelled c naturally refine to a fibre sequence in
                             1
Funcodesc (Stf2 , Sp) ≃ Sp∆ . At (∗, ∗) the sequence evaluates to zero. At (∗, ∅), the morphism la-
                                                                                     per
belled b becomes an equivalence, hence the lower square is cartesian. But further, Skar  (∗, ∅) ≃ 0 and
the morphism labelled a becomes an equivalence by construction. This refines the lower composite
to a fibre sequence, as claimed.
   Under the conditions of the lemma, the morphism labelled b is an equivalence, hence the lower
                                 per
square cartesian, and further Skar   (X, A) = 0, so that S(X, A) identifies with the fibre of the mor-
phism labelled c, so indeed the morphism labelled a is an equivalence.                               □

3.4. Total surgery obstructions. In this section, we review Ranicki’s total surgery obstruction, and
explain how it is used in this article about the Nielsen realisation problem. Let (X, ∂X) be an oriented
Poincaré pair. We assume that it is finite, i.e. that both X and ∂X have the homotopy type of finite
CW complexes. The total surgery obstruction, specialised to finite oriented Poincaré pairs (X, ∂X)
is an element
(27)                                   tso(X, ∂X) ∈ πd S(X, ∂X).
It vanishes when there is an equivalence of pairs (X, ∂X) ≃ (M, ∂M ) to a compact manifold with
boundary. The converse is true if the dimension of (X, ∂X) is at least 6.

Theorem 3.4.1 ([Ran92], p. 210). If dim(X, ∂X) ≥ 6, and tso(X, ∂X) = 0 ∈ πd S(X, ∂X), then
there exists a compact manifold pair (M, ∂M ) with a homotopy equivalence
                                                     ≃
                                         (M, ∂M ) −
                                                  → (X, ∂X).
                      ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER               14


Remark 3.4.2 (Compatibility with Poincaré bordism, cf. [Ran92] Sec. 19 and Prop. 21.2.). We briefly
remark on the compatibility of the total surgery obstruction with Poincaré bordism. First, we describe
a functor ΩPD
           ∗ (−) from the category Stf to the category of graded abelian groups.
                                        2


       (1) The group ΩPDd (X, A) is generated by maps (Y, ∂Y ) → (X, A), where (Y, ∂Y ) is an oriented
           d-dimensional Poincaré pair. Such a generator is called a singular oriented Poincaré pair in
           (X, A). Two classes (Yi , ∂Yi ) → (X, A) are declared equivalent provided there is a singular
           oriented Poincaré bordism of pairs between them.
       (2) Given a map of pairs f : (X, A) → (X ′ , A′ ), postcomposing singular Poincaré pairs in (X, A)
           with f induces a map ΩPD                PD
                                    ∗ (X, A) → Ω∗ (X , A ).
                                                           ′   ′

       (3) Given a finite covering of pairs p : (X, A) → (X, A), pulling back singular pairs in (X, A)
           along p induces a map ΩPD                PD
                                     ∗ (X, A) → Ω∗ (X, A).

The spectrum S(X, ∂X) is constructed so that there is a map of graded abelian groups

(28)                                     ΩPD
                                          ∗ (X, A) → π∗ S(X, A)


natural in Stf2 . If (X, ∂X) is an oriented d-dimensional Poincaré pair, the identity defines a class in
 d (X, ∂X), whose image under the map (28) is the element tso(X, ∂X).
ΩPD

   The total surgery obstruction is well-behaved with respect to finite coverings: given a finite cov-
ering of finite Poincaré pairs p : (Y, ∂Y ) → (X, ∂X), the induced map

(29)                                 p∗ : πd S(X, ∂X) → πd S(Y, ∂Y )

sends tso(X, ∂X) to tso(Y, ∂Y ). This is a consequence of Remark 3.4.2, see also [DL24, Thm. 6.3.].


                          4. Structure spectra of fixed-point complements
   Throughout this section, we place ourselves in the situation of §2 and assume given a finite good
decomposition of the G-space XBor = π\Efin Γ. To fix notation, we write the corresponding pushout
as

                                              ∂C             C
(30)
                                              G
                                             XBor          XBor

and write (Q, ∂Q) := G\(C, ∂C) for the complement quotient. The ultimate goal of this section is to
prove that under mild assumptions, the transfer map

(31)                                   πd S(Q, ∂Q) → πd S(C e , ∂C e )

is injective. In light of §3.4, this is useful to show that tso(Q, ∂Q) vanishes, reducing it to showing
that tso(C e , ∂C e ) = 0. To achieve this, we will actually fully compute the spectrum S(Q, ∂Q) along
the way. In fact, we show that the structure spectrum assembly map
                                                             ≃
(32)                               (τ≤0 Lq (∗)) ⊗ (Q, ∂Q) −
                                                          → S(Q, ∂Q)

is an equivalence, by verifying the conditions of Lemma 3.3.9. The injectivity of the transfer map then
proceeds by a careful comparison with the transfer in integral homology, see Theorem 4.5.2.
                     ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                15


4.1. Outline and first observations. To show that the structure spectrum assembly map
                       ≃
                       → S(Q, ∂Q) is an equivalence, we have to verify two conditions from
(τ≤0 Lq (∗)) ⊗ (Q, ∂Q) −
Lemma 3.3.9.
                          per
       (a) The spectrum Skar  (Q, ∂Q) vanishes.
       (b) The map Lq (Q, ∂Q) → Lq (Q, ∂Q) is an equivalence.
Using Proposition 3.1.2, we may reformulate (b) as the statement that the map ktC2 (Q, ∂Q) →
KtC2 (Q, ∂Q) is an equivalence. Both (a) and (b) are justified using the Farrell–Jones conjecture in
algebraic K- and L-theory.
   Recall that we write O := π1 ((XBor )hG ). Write resO
                                                       G : SG → SO for the restriction functor along
the quotient map O → G. Note that resG is right adjoint to the quotient functor π\(−) : SO → SG ,
                                        O

so we in particular get an adjunction unit
(33)                           q : Efin O → resO                 O
                                               G (π\Efin O) ≃ resG XBor .

Base change along q defines a functor q ∗ : (SO )/resO
                                                     G XBor
                                                            → (SO )/Efin O . Consider the composite
                                        resO                    q∗
(34)                                     G
                              −) : SG −−−→
                             (b            (SO )/resO
                                                    G XBor
                                                           −→ (SO )/Efin O .

              G and q are colimit preserving functors, also (−) preserves colimits. Applying (−) to
Since both resO       ∗                                      b                                b
the square (30) we obtain a pushout of O-spaces

                                               ∂C
                                               c            C
                                                            b
(35)
                                           [
                                           X G           Efin O.
                                            Bor

In the next section, we use Davis–Lück assembly to reduce both (a) and (b) to computations with
certain homology theories on the category of O-spaces. For these computations, it is essential that
we understand the lower horizontal map in (35). For this, we make the following definition.
Definition 4.1.1. A subgroup F ⊂ O is full if the composite F ⊂ O → G is an isomorphism. We
write M for a set of representatives of conjugacy classes of full finite subgroups of O.
Lemma 4.1.2. If XBor admits a good decomposition, then
                         a                                 a
(36)             [
                 X G
                  Bor ≃       indO                     G
                                 NO F Efin NO F and XBor ≃   BWO F.
                              F ∈M                                      F ∈M


Proof. Since both ∂C
                  f and C b are built from free orbits, we see that X [ G
                                                                        Bor ≃ (Efin O)
                                                                                      >1
                                                                                         . Note that since
the G-action on X  G
                     is trivial, X
                     Bor
                                 [ G   is built from cells with full isotropy groups. So Lemma A.2 and
                                     Bor
Lemma A.4 give the assertions.                                                                         □
4.2. Davis–Lück assembly and the Farrell–Jones conjecture. We want to prove two results about
the complement quotient (Q, ∂Q).
       (1) The map ktC2 (Q, ∂Q) → KtC2 (Q, ∂Q) is an equivalence.
                                                    per
       (2) The periodic Karoubi structure spectrum Skar (Q, ∂Q) vanishes.
To prove these assertions, we will employ the technique of Davis–Lück assembly. This is a convenient
framework to compute with Farrell–Jones assembly maps.
    Let Γ be a discrete group. Recall that the category of Γ-spaces SΓ = P(Orb(Γ)) is freely generated
under colimits by the orbit category Orb(Γ). That means that a colimit preserving functor SΓ → Sp
is determined by its restriction to the orbit category Orb(Γ) ⊂ SΓ , and the inverse of this procedure
is given by left Kan extension.
                   ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER              16


Construction 4.2.1 (Davis–Lück equivariant homology theories, [DL98]). Consider a functor
(37)                                        H : Gpd → Sp
from the category of (1–)groupoids to the category of spectra, which we will refer to as a spectral
equivariant homology theory. Given a discrete group Γ, we obtain a functor HΓ : SΓ → Sp by left Kan
extending the composite
                                                 (−)hΓ            H
(38)                                  Orb(Γ) −−−−→ Gpd −→ Sp
to SΓ . We will refer to HΓ as the spectral Γ-homology theory associated to H. Here, we have used that
for a transitive Γ-set S, the homotopy orbits ShΓ are a groupoid. In fact, (Γ/H)hΓ ≃ BH. Given a
group homomorphism α : Γ → Γ′ we get an induced functor
(39)                                  indα : Orb(Γ) → Orb(Γ′ ).
The left diagram below evidently commutes, providing a lax Beck-Chevalley square in the right dia-
gram below.
                               resα                                      indα
                   SΓ                      SΓ′               SΓ                    SΓ′
                                                                         =⇒
(40)                           resα              ′                       indα            ′
                   S BΓ                   S BΓ               S BΓ                 S BΓ

                                                                 (−)hΓ          (−)hΓ′
                                S                                         S
Restricting along Orb(Γ) ⊂ SΓ , we obtain a comparison map wα : (−)hΓ → (indα (−))hΓ′ . Left Kan
extending to SΓ we get a comparison map
                                                             ′
(41)                                  H(α) : HΓ → HΓ ◦ indα .
On the orbit Γ/H, the map wα is the evident map BH → Bα(H), where α(H) is the image subgroup
of H under α in Γ′ . Therefore, wα is an equivalence on those orbits Γ/H where H intersects the kernel
of α trivially. Hence, H(α) is an equivalence on the category of all Γ-spaces generated under colimits
by the orbits {Γ/H | H ∩ ker(α) = {e}}.

Example 4.2.2. For E ∈ {k, K, ktC2 , KtC2 , L, L} we have the functor
(42)                           E : S → Sp,           X 7→ E((ModfZ , Ϙq )X )
We may restrict E along the inclusion functor Gpd ⊂ S to obtain a spectral equivariant homology
theory as in Construction 4.2.1. We write
(43)                                     H Γ (−; E) : SΓ → Sp
for the associated spectral Γ-homology theory. Note for example, that H Γ (Γ/H; L) = Lq (BH).

    A use of Davis–Lück assembly is that certain assembly maps can be studied in terms of equivariant
homology theories. This is in particular useful in the context of the Farrell–Jones conjecture. Recall
that a family of subgroups of a discrete group Γ is a collection of subgroups closed under passing to
subgroups and under conjugation. Let F be a family of subgroups of Γ. The universal Γ-space for F
is the Γ-space EF Γ with
                                                 (
                                                   ∗ : if H ∈ F;
(44)                                (EF Γ) ≃H
                                                   ∅ : otherwise.
                    ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER               17


Typical families we consider are the families fin and vc of finite and virtually cyclic subgroups. Given
a family F we write OrbF (Γ) for the subcategory of Orb(Γ) spanned by those orbits having isotropy
contained in F.
Lemma 4.2.3 (Davis–Lück assembly). Let Γ be a discrete group, and H : Gpd → Sp a functor. The
two maps
(45)                   colim      H(ShΓ ) → H(BΓ)       and     HΓ (EF Γ) → HΓ (∗)
                     S∈OrbF (Γ)

are equivalent.
Proof. See [BKW26, Sec. 2].                                                                           □
  Next, we recall the Farrell–Jones conjecture. After that, we briefly recall a large class of groups
where it is known to hold. In the rest of the article, we often use it as an input for computations.
Conjecture 4.2.4 (The Farrell–Jones conjecture, integer coefficients). Let Γ be a discrete group, and
vc the family of virtually cyclic subgroups of Γ. Then the assembly maps
(46)                 H Γ (Evc Γ; K) → H Γ (∗; K) and H Γ (Evc Γ; L) → H Γ (∗; L)
are equivalences.
Recollections 4.2.5. Recall the notion of a Farrell–Jones group from [Lüc25]. For every Farrell–Jones
group Γ, Conjecture 4.2.4 is known to be true. Farrell–Jones groups are closed under passing to sub-
groups and passing to overgroups with finite index. Word-hyperbolic groups are Farrell–Jones groups,
see [BLR08]. See [Lüc25, Sec. 16.2.] for a comprehensive survey of the current status and [BKW26] for
a higher categorical approach in the case of K-theory. The L-theoretic analog for Poincaré categories
with a group action, is work in progress by Christoph Winges [Win].
  We need the following companion results on the Farrell–Jones conjecture which we adapt to our
modernised setup.
Remark 4.2.6 (The transitivity principle). Let H : Gpd → Sp be a spectral equivariant homology
theory, and Γ a discrete group. Suppose given two families of subgroups F ⊂ F ′ of Γ. For each
H ∈ F ′ , write F ∩ H for the family of subgroups of H which lie in F. Assume that for each H ∈ F ′
the map
(47)                                   HH (EF ∩H H) → HH (∗)
is an equivalence. Then, if Z ∈ SΓ has isotropy in the family F ′ , also the map
(48)                                   HΓ (Z × EF Γ) → HΓ (Z)
is an equivalence. So in particular for Z = EF ′
                                                 Γ the map HΓ (EF Γ) → HΓ (EF ′ Γ) is an equivalence.
The proof in [Lüc25, Sec. 15.5] carries over verbatim.
Lemma 4.2.7. If Γ is a discrete group, and all subgroups of Γ satisfy the Farrell–Jones conjecture Con-
jecture 4.2.4, then if F is any family containing all virtually cyclic subgroups, the assembly maps
(49)                 H Γ (EF Γ; K) → H Γ (∗; K) and H Γ (EF Γ; L) → H Γ (∗; L)
are equivalences.
Proof. If H ⊂ Γ is a subgroup, then vc ∩ H is the family of virtually cyclic subgroups of H. So the
transitivity principle Remark 4.2.6 implies that the maps
(50)              H Γ (Evc Γ; K) → H Γ (EF Γ; K) and H Γ (Evc Γ; L) → H Γ (EF Γ; L)
are equivalences. Combining this with the Farrell–Jones conjecture for Γ gives the result.            □
                      ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                 18


Recollections 4.2.8 (Virtually cyclic subgroups of type I and II, [Lüc25], Lem. 13.42.). For the next
lemma, we recall that virtually cyclic groups come in two varieties. A virtually cyclic group V is of
type I if it is finite or admits a surjection p : V → Z to the group of integers. If V is not of type I, we
say it is of type II. Every type II virtually cyclic subgroup has elements of even order. The L-theory of
group rings on type II virtually cyclic subgroups is quite complicated, see [CD04]. For type I virtually
cyclic subgroups, the situation is considerably simpler.
Lemma 4.2.9. If Γ is a discrete group which contains no virtually cyclic subgroups of type II (e.g. Γ has
no elements of even order), then the map
(51)                                     H Γ (Efin Γ; L) → H Γ (Evc Γ; L)
is an equivalence.
Proof. By the transitivity principle Remark 4.2.6 we may reduce to the case where Γ itself is a virtually
cyclic subgroup of type I. If Γ is finite, the statement is clear. If Γ is infinite, it has a unique maximal
finite subgroup F ⊂ Γ, and Γ/F is infinite cyclic. Since F is a unique maximal subgroup, the full
subcategory {Γ/F } of Orbfin (Γ) spanned by Γ/F is final.
   The subcategory spanned by Γ/G is equivalent to BWΓ F ≃ BZ, and the map BΓ ≃ BNΓ F →
BWΓ F ≃ BZ corresponds to a Z-action on the space BF . By Davis–Lück assembly Lemma 4.2.3
and finality of {Γ/F } ⊂ Orbfin (Γ), the map (51) identifies with the assembly map
(52)                          colim L((ModfZ , Ϙq )BF ) → L((ModfZ , Ϙq )BΓ ).
                                BZ
But this map is an equivalence by the twisted Shaneson splitting, see [LNS25, Sec. 4].                   □
4.3. L-theoretic computations. In this subsection, we use Davis–Lück’s assembly method to prove
the following result. Recall the notations O and XBor from §2.
Theorem 4.3.1. Assume that O is a Farrell–Jones group which contains no virtually cyclic subgroups
of type II. For any finite good decomposition of XBor with complement quotient (Q, ∂Q), we have
                                                per
(53)                                           Skar (Q, ∂Q) ≃ 0.
Proof. Using the commutative diagram (35) we build the following diagram of spectra.

                                     H O (∂C;
                                          c L)                                    C
                                                                                  b


                                             O
                     H O (X
                          [ G                                               H O (Efin O; L)
                                   `
                           Bor ≃     F ∈M indNO F Efin NO F ; L)
(54)

                         H O ( F ∈M indO                                    H O (Evc O; L)
                              `
                                       NO F Evc NO F ; L)



                              HO(                                             H O (∗; L)
                                     `
                                       F ∈M O/NO F ; L)
                         per
Unraveling identifies Skar   (Q, ∂Q) with the total cofibre of the outermost square of (54). We argue
that all three squares are pushout squares. This implies the result, since then the outer square is a
pushout as well, and the total cofibre of a pushout square is zero.
   The first square is a pushout square, since it is constructed by applying H O (−; L) to a pushout of
O-spaces. In the second square, both vertical maps are equivalences by Lemma 4.2.9, using that O
has no virtually cyclic subgroups of type II. The vertical maps in the third square are equivalences as
a consequence of the Farrell–Jones conjecture for L.                                                 □
                      ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER               19


4.4. K-theory. Our next objective is to show that the map ktC2 (Q, ∂Q) → KtC2 (Q, ∂Q) is an equiv-
alence. We start with a preliminary lemma, that reduces to a statement about K-without taking Tate
fixed points. This is practical for considerations with the Farrell–Jones conjecture: the Farrell–Jones
conjecture involves an infinite colimit, and the Tate construction does not commute with all colimits.

Lemma 4.4.1. Let (Y, A) be a pair of spaces. Suppose the following assumptions are satisfied.
       (1) The map K0 (A)/k0 (A) → K0 (Y )/k0 (Y ) is an isomorphism.
       (2) For each i ≤ −1, the map Ki (A) → Ki (Y ) is an isomorphism.
Then the map ktC2 (Y, A) → KtC2 (Y, A) is an isomorphism.

Proof. Recall the definition of k(Y, A) as k((ModfZ )(Y,A) ), as constructed by (16). Note that the stable
category underlying Met(ModfZ )Y is the arrow category of (ModfZ )Y , the tensor of ModfZ over Y .
Hence k(Met(ModfZ )Y ) ≃ k(Y ) ⊕ k(Y ). This leads to the observation, that without regard for the
C2 -action k(Y, A) ≃ k(Y ) ⊕ k(A). Similarly K(Y, A) ≃ K(Y ) ⊕ K(A).
   With these preliminary observations in mind, consider the following commuting diagram, where
α and β are induced by the inclusion of pairs (A, A) ⊂ (Y, A).
                                                      α
                                          k(A, A)           k(Y, A)
(55)
                                                       β
                                          K(A, A)          K(Y, A)

Since ktC2 (A, A) ≃ KtC2 (A, A) ≃ 0 by bordism invariance, we observe that the map ktC2 (Y, A) →
KtC2 (Y, A) is an equivalence if and only if the map cofib(α)tC2 → cofib(β)tC2 is an equivalence. This
is true, for example, if before taking Tate fixed points, the map cofib(α) → cofib(β) is an equivalence.
    Our preliminary observations identify this map exactly with the map k(Y )/k(A) → K(Y )/K(A).
This map is an equivalence if and only if the map K(A)/k(A) → K(Y )/k(Y ) is an equivalence. We
claim that this reduces to the two claims in the statement of the lemma. For any space Y , we have
that π∗ K(Y )/k(Y ) vanishes for ∗ ≥ 2. For ∗ = 1, 0 we consider the exact sequence
                  i                                          i
(56)               1
          k1 (Y ) −→                                     0
                     K1 (Y ) → π1 K(Y )/k(Y ) → k0 (Y ) −→ K0 (Y ) → π0 K(Y )/k(Y ) → k−1 (Y ).
First, the map i1 is an isomorphism and i0 is an injective map. This shows that π1 K(Y )/k(Y ) = 0.
Second, k−1 (Y ) = 0, so the sequence induces an isomorphism K0 (Y )/k0 (Y ) ≃ π0 K(Y )/k(Y ).
Lastly, we observe that for ∗ ≤ −1 we have that the map π∗ K(Y ) → π∗ K(Y )/k(Y ) is an isomor-
phism. Hence, the map π∗ K(A)/k(A) → π∗ K(Y )/k(Y ) is always an isomorphism for ∗ ≥ 1, under
the first condition for ∗ = 0 and under the second condition for ∗ ≤ −1.                         □

Observation 4.4.2. Note that the criterion derived in Lemma 4.4.1 only depends on the 1-type of (Y, A).
For relevance to us, if (Y, A) → (Y ′ , A′ ) is a π–π-equivalence of pairs, the criterion is satisfied for
(Y, A) if and only if it is satisfied for (Y ′ , A′ ).

Lemma 4.4.3. Let Γ be a Farrell–Jones group. Suppose that X is a Γ-space with torsion-free isotropy
groups. Then the map
(57)                                      H Γ (X; k) → H Γ (X; K)
is an isomorphism.

Proof. Both sides commute with colimits of spaces with torsion-free isotropy groups, so the statement
reduces to the case X = Γ/V , where V is a torsionfree subgroup. In this case, it unravels to the map
(58)                                     k(ModfZV ) → K(ModfZV )
                   ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER              20


being an isomorphism. In other words, we have to show that K(ModfZV ) is connective and that
K0 (ModfZV ) is cyclic, generated by a free module of rank one. Since Z is a regular ring, this is a
consequence of the Farrell–Jones conjecture for V [Lüc25, Conj. 2.60 and 4.18].                  □

Lemma 4.4.4. Let Γ be any discrete group, and let f : X → Y be any map of Γ-spaces. If f e : XhΓ
                                                                                              e
                                                                                                 →
 e
YhΓ induces a bijection on path components, the induced map

(59)                                 π∗ H Γ (X; k) → π∗ H Γ (Y ; k)

is an isomorphism for ∗ ≤ 0.

Proof. For ∗ ≤ −1, both sides are zero, since H Γ (−; k) has connective coefficients, and connective
spectra are closed under colimits. For ∗ = 0, observe that we can reduce to the map Y × EΓ → Y ,
since π0 H Γ (Y × EΓ; k) ≃ π0 k(∗) ⊗ YhΓ   e
                                             only depends on the path components of YhΓ  e
                                                                                           . For this
case, observe that π0 commutes with colimits of connective spectra, hence we may reduce further
to the case of an orbit Γ/H. But the map π0 H Γ (Γ/H × EΓ; k) → H Γ (Γ/H; k) identifies with the
map π0 k(ModfZ ) ⊗ BH+ → π0 k(ModfZH ), which is an isomorphism: both sides are isomorphic to
Z, detected by the rank of a free Z- resp. ZH-module.                                              □

   After these general considerations, we again specialise to the study of complement quotients
(Q, ∂Q) and the orbifold fundamental group O. To this end, we introduce a few families of sub-
groups. Let Ftf be the family of torsionfree subgroups of the orbifold fundamental group O. Recall
the notion of a full subgroup of O from Definition 4.1.1. We define a family of subgroups Fn by

(60)             Fn := {H ⊂ O | H is torsionfree or normalises a full subgroup}.

Observation 4.4.5. Note that Fn is indeed a family, and Ftf ⊂ Fn . By the second point of Lemma A.3,
every type I virtually cyclic subgroup of O is contained in Fn .

Lemma 4.4.6. There is a pushout of O-spaces as follows.
                               `
                                F ∈M (O/NO F ) × EFtf O               EFtf O
(61)
                                   `
                                      F ∈M O/NO F                     EFn O

Proof. We may compute that the square is a pushout after passing to H-fixed points for all subgroups
H ⊂ O. If H ∈ Ftf or H ∈        / Fn , this is clear. If H ∈ Fn but H ∈    / Ftf , then after applying
(−)H the upper horizontal map in (61) is an equivalence, and the lower right corner is contractible.
Hence, we have to show that the lower left corner in (61) has exactly one H-fixed point. Suppose that
HgNO F = gNO F . Then H ⊂ gNO F g −1 = NO gF g −1 . In other words, the set of H-fixed points in
question is in bijection with the set of full subgroups Fe with H ⊂ NO Fe.
   Since H ∈ Fn is not torsionfree, this set is non-empty. To show that it has at most one point,
observe that H contains a finite subgroup Hfin . If H ⊂ NO Fe, then Hfin ⊂ Fe by Lemma A.1. But
Hfin is contained in exactly one full subgroup by Lemma A.2.                                        □

Theorem 4.4.7. Suppose XBor admits a good decomposition (30) and that O is a Farrell–Jones group
without virtually cyclic subgroups of type II. Then the comparison map induces an equivalence
                                                  ≃
(62)                               ktC2 (Q, ∂Q) −
                                                → KtC2 (Q, ∂Q).
                   ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER             21


Proof. For this proof, we write S for the O-set F ∈M O/NO F . Observe that there is a π–π-
                                               `

equivalence (Q, ∂Q) → (O/OhO , ShO ) by Lemma A.4. Consider the following square.

                                   H∗O (S; k)          H∗O (O/O; k)
(63)

                                   H∗O (S; K)         H∗O (O/O; K)
By Lemma 4.4.1 and Observation 4.4.2 it suffices to show that for ∗ ≤ 0, the map induced on vertical
cokernels in (63) is an isomorphism. We can precompose these vertical maps by the maps induced by
the projections EFtf O → O/O and EFtf O × S → S. For T = S resp. T = O/O, the composite
(64)                      H∗O (T × EFtf O; k) → H∗O (T ; k) → H∗O (T ; K)
has the same image for ∗ ≤ 0 as left resp. right vertical map in (63) by Lemma 4.4.4. With this
observation in mind, we factor the map (64) to draw the following diagram.

                             H∗O (S × EFtf O; k)           H∗O (EFtf O; k)


                             H∗O (S × EFtf O; K)           H∗O (EFtf O; K)
(65)

                                  H∗O (S; K)               H∗O (EFn O; K)
                                                                    q

                                                              H∗O (O/O; K)
We argued that for ∗ ≤ 0 the image of the vertical composites in (65) agrees with the image of the
vertical maps in (63). By Lemma 4.4.3, the vertical maps in the upper square are isomorphisms. Using
the assumption that O contains no type II virtually cyclic subgroups, Observation 4.4.5 shows that we
have an inclusion of families vc ⊂ Fn . As O is Farrell–Jones group, Lemma 4.2.7 implies that the map
labelled q is an isomorphism as well. The middle square in (65) is induced by passing to homotopy
groups in a pushout of spectra: it is given by applying the O-homology theory H O (−; K) to the
pushout Lemma 4.4.6. To deduce that the induced maps on vertical cokernels of homotopy groups are
isomorphisms, it suffices to show that the vertical maps are injective on homotopy groups for ∗ ≤ 0.
To see this, we unravel the equivalent vertical maps in (63) instead. They identify with the maps
          M                       M
(66)           k∗ (ModfZNO F ) →        K∗ (ModfZNO F ) and k∗ (ModfZO ) → K∗ (ModfZO ).
        F ∈M                      F ∈M

Both maps are injective for ∗ ≤ 0. Indeed, for any discrete group V , we can use the augmentation
map ZV → Z to construct the composite
(67)                         k∗ (ModfZV ) → K∗ (ModfZV ) → K∗ (ModfZ )
and this composite is an isomorphism for ∗ ≤ 0, proving injectivity of the first map.              □
   The results Theorem 4.3.1 and Theorem 4.4.7 are exactly the assumptions for Lemma 3.3.9 to apply,
allowing us to deduce the following.

Corollary 4.4.8. Suppose that XBor admits a good decomposition with complement-quotient (Q, ∂Q),
and that O is a Farrell–Jones group without virtually cyclic subgroups of type II. Then the structure
spectrum assembly map
                                                          ≃
(68)                            (τ≤0 Lq (∗)) ⊗ (Q, ∂Q) −
                                                       → S(Q, ∂Q)
                   ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                22


is an equivalence. In particular, if (Q, ∂Q) is d-dimensional, Ω∞+d+1 S(Q, ∂Q) = ∗.
   Our method to identify S(Q, ∂Q) can be used to compute some Whitehead groups and reduced
projective class groups of integral group rings, which might be of independent interest.
Proof of Theorem C. Consider the following diagram.
                               `
                                 F ∈M Γ/NΓ F × EΓ                   EΓ
                                             q                         p

(69)
                               `
                                 F ∈M Γ/NΓ F × EFtf Γ             EFtf Γ

                                     `
                                       F ∈M Γ/NΓ F                EFn Γ

The map H Γ (Γ/H ×EΓ; K) → H Γ (Γ/H; K) is an equivalence whenever H is a torsionfree subgroup
by the Farrell–Jones conjecture for the regular ring Z [Lüc25, Thm. 13.65(ii)]. Hence, upon applying
H Γ (−; K), the maps labelled p and q become equivalences. Since the lower square is a pushout, this
implies that H Γ (−; K) sends the outer square to a pushout. Since vc ⊂ Fn , the map H Γ (EFn Γ; K) →
H Γ (Γ/Γ; K) is an equivalence. Unraveling, this yields that the following diagram of assembly maps
                             L
                                F ∈M BNΓ F ⊗ K(Z)             BΓ ⊗ K(Z)
(70)
                               L
                                   F ∈M K(ZNΓ F )                K(ZΓ)
is a pushout. In particular, the map induced on vertical cofibres is an equivalence. Applying π1 to this
equivalence yields the claim about Whitehead groups, and applying π0 yields the claim about reduced
projective class groups.                                                                              □
Remark 4.4.9. In the diagram (70), the ring Z can be replaced by a regular ring R, and it is still a
pushout. Indeed, the additional input is that if V is torsionfree, then the assembly map BV ⊗K(R) →
K(RV ) is an equivalence [Lüc25, Thm. 13.65(ii)], so the proof applies verbatim.
4.5. The structure spectrum assembly map and injectivity of the transfer. In this subsection
we concern ourselves with proving the desired injectivity of the transfer map
(71)                                πd S(Q, ∂Q) → πd S(C e , ∂C e ).
Here d is the dimension of the complement-quotient (Q, ∂Q) as a Poincaré duality pair, so the degree
in which the element tso(Q, ∂Q) lives. Our method is to exploit that the structure spectrum assembly
map is an equivalence by Corollary 4.4.8, and to compare with the transfer on singular homology.
Recall that π0 Lq (∗) ≃ Z induced by dividing the signature of a nondegenerate quadratic form over
the integers by 8. Using this isomorphism, we get a map of spectra
                                                        u
(72)                               Z ≃ τ≥0 (τ≤0 Lq (∗)) −
                                                        → τ≤0 Lq (∗).
This produces a map of functors Z⊗(−) → τ≤0 Lq (∗)⊗(−) in Fun(Stf2 , Sp). Note that πi (Z⊗(Y, A))
computes the singular homology Hi (Y, A; Z). Since (Q, ∂Q) has vanishing singular homology in
degrees ∗ ≥ d + 1 by Poincaré–Lefschetz duality, a simple computation with the Atiyah-Hirzebruch
spectral sequence proves the following.
Corollary 4.5.1. Under the assumptions of Corollary 4.4.8, the structure spectrum of the complement-
quotient (Q, ∂Q) satisfies
(73)                          Ω∞+d S(Q, ∂Q) ≃ Ω∞+d (Z ⊗ (Q, ∂Q)).
                     ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                23


In particular, πd S(Q, ∂Q) ∼
                           = Hd (Q, ∂Q) is an infinite cyclic group, and Ω∞+d+1 S(Q, ∂Q) ≃ ∗.
  The addendum Ω∞+d+1 S(Q, ∂Q) ≃ ∗ is interesting for the purpose of computing block homeo-
morphism groups. Our main application only concerns πd S(Q, ∂Q).

Theorem 4.5.2. Suppose that XBor admits a finite good decomposition with complement-quotient
(Q, ∂Q) a d-dimensional Poincaré pair, and that O is a Farrell–Jones group that does not contain any
virtually cyclic subgroups of type II. Then the transfer map
(74)                                   πd S(Q, ∂Q) → πd S(C e , ∂C e )
is injective.

Proof. Let q : (C e , ∂C e ) → (Q, ∂Q) denote the covering map. Recall that it is obtained by taking
the quotient by the action of the finite group G. We use the map u of (72) to construct the following
commuting diagram.

                 πd Z ⊗ (Q, ∂Q)             πd (τ≤0 Lq (∗)) ⊗ (Q, ∂Q)            S(Q, ∂Q)
                          q∗                               q∗                          q∗

(75)            πd Z ⊗ (C e , ∂C e )       πd (τ≤0 Lq (∗)) ⊗ (C e , ∂C e )      S(C e , ∂C e )
                          q!                               q!                          q!

                 πd Z ⊗ (Q, ∂Q)             πd (τ≤0 Lq (∗)) ⊗ (Q, ∂Q)            S(Q, ∂Q)

Here, the maps q ∗ denote the transfer map, provided by the wrong way functoriality in finite cov-
erings, and q! denotes forward functoriality. By Corollary 4.5.1, the upper horizontal composite and
the lower horizontal composite are isomorphisms. Hence, to prove injectivity of the desired transfer
map, it suffices to show that the left vertical composite is injective. By Proposition B.3, this composite
is given by multiplication with the number of sheets of the covering q, which is exactly the order of
the finite group G. But the group πd Z ⊗ (Q, ∂Q) is infinite cyclic, so multiplication with any nonzero
number is injective.                                                                                    □

  Before moving on with our construction of group actions on aspherical manifolds, we briefly prove
our application to block homeomorphisms of topological manifolds.

Proof of Theorem D. We note that the group O := π1 (MhG ) contains the fundamental group of a
closed, nonpositively curved manifold as a finite index subgroup, hence it is a Farrell–Jones group.
Since G is assumed to have odd order, O does not contain elements of even order, and hence no
virtually cyclic subgroups of type II. In total, (N, ∂N ) satisfies the assumptions of Corollary 4.5.1, so
Ω∞+d+1 S(N, ∂N ) ≃ ∗.
   Write Sgeo
            s
               (N, ∂N ) for the simple geometric structure space of (N, ∂N ), and Sgeoh
                                                                                        (N, ∂N ) for the
geometric structure space. There is a map of spaces
(76)                                    s
                                       Sgeo (N, ∂N ) → Sgeo (N, ∂N )
which is an equivalence, provided that the map induced on Whitehead groups Wh(∂N ) → Wh(N )
is an isomorphism. This holds in our case by Theorem C. Ranicki’s main theorem on the total surgery
obstruction identifies Sgeo
                        h
                            (N, ∂N ) ≃ Ω∞+d+1 S(N, ∂N ) ≃ ∗. Hence Sgeos
                                                                          (N, ∂N ) ≃ ∗.
    Let hAut (N, ∂N ) ⊂ hAut(N, ∂N ) denote the collection of components on the simple homotopy
            s

equivalences: homotopy equivalences (f, ∂f ) : (N, ∂N ) → (N, ∂N ) such that both f and ∂f are
simple. Then, from the s-cobordism theorem for manifold triads

(77)    πk hAuts (N, ∂N )/ ^                  s
                          Homeo(N, ∂N ) ≃ π0 Sgeo,∂0
                                                     (N × Dk , ∂N × Dk ) ≃ πk Sgeo
                                                                               s
                                                                                   (N, ∂N ).
                    ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER              24


Here, ∂0 is the pair (N × S k−1 , ∂N × S k−1 ), and π0 Sgeo,∂
                                                        s
                                                             0
                                                               (N × Dk , ∂N × Dk ) is Wall’s simple
structure set of the triad (N × Dk , ∂N × Dk , N × S k−1 ) relative to N × S k−1 .               □

                                               5. Gluing
   Suppose given a manifold pair (N , ∂N ) with a free action by a finite group G, and a manifold L
with a trivial G-action. Suppose further given an equivariant map p : ∂N → L. In the (homotopy)
pushout of G-spaces

                                              ∂N          N
(78)                                            p

                                               L          X
the G-space X is a G-Poincaré duality space, provided that p has compact fibres which are equivalent
to spheres after forgetting the group action. We want to study the question when the G-homotopy
type X is equivalent to closed topological manifold with G-action.
5.1. Manifold approximate fibrations and teardrop neighborhoods. As alluded to in the intro-
duction, if p would be homotopic to an equivariant sphere bundle projection, one could glue in the
corresponding disc bundle. This condition is trivially fulfilled in the case where L is a discrete set,
but can usually not be expected. In this section, we show that we can glue L and (N , ∂N ) under
much weaker assumptions. The crucial notion is that of an approximate fibration, which we recall for
continuous maps between euclidean neighborhood retracts (ENRs).
Definition 5.1.1. A continuous map p : E → B between ENRs is an approximate fibration if
       (1) it is a proper map;
       (2) for each open subset U ⊂ B the square
                                            p−1 (U )          E
(79)

                                               U              B
          is homotopy cartesian.
   The notion of approximate fibrations was introduced by Coram-Duvall [CD77], and recently re-
visited in the context of higher topos theory in [KV25], where a few equivalent characterisations are
given. In the situation of the pushout (78), we can construct a manifold in the G-homotopy type X,
provided there is an approximate fibration
(80)                                    q : G\∂C × R → L × R
which induces the map G\p : G\∂C → L up to homotopy. The key is the following construction
which was brought to our attention by Shmuel Weinberger.
Construction 5.1.2 ([HTW90], Sec. 3). Let E and B be topological spaces, and let p : E → B × R be a
map. Then the teardrop construction on p is the topological space E ∪p B where
       (1) the underlying set of E ∪p B is the union of E and B;
       (2) the topology is minimal with the property that E ⊂ E ∪p B is an open embedding and that
           the map
                                                           (
                                                             p(x)     for x ∈ E;
                      E ∪p B → B × (−∞, +∞], x 7→
                                                             (x, +∞) for x ∈ B;
          is continous, where (−∞, ∞] is topologised to be homeomorphic to (0, 1].
                      ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER            25


Remark 5.1.3. [HTW+00, Thm. 2.2.] says that the homeomorphism type of the teardrop construction
on p only depends on the controlled homeomorphism type of E over B.

Proposition 5.1.4. Let p : E → B × R be an approximate fibration. Assume that
       (1) both E and B are topological manifolds;
       (2) the homotopy fibres of p are equivalent to spheres.
Then the teardrop E ∪p B on p is a topological manifold.

Proof. We check that E ∪p B is locally euclidean, the Hausdorff property and second countability are
easily verified. Since E is locally euclidean and E ⊂ E ∪p B is open, it suffices to check that each
x ∈ B ⊂ E ∪p B has a euclidean neighborhood. Observe that for an open neighborhood x ∈ U ⊂ B,
the teardrop on the approximate fibration p : p−1 (U × R) → U × R is an open neighborhood of
x ∈ E ∪p B. So we may assume for the rest of the proof that B is a euclidean space Rk . The
teardrop of the projection map π : S d−k−1 × Rk × R → Rk × R is homeomorphic to Rd . Hence, by
Remark 5.1.3 it suffices to argue that any approximate fibration q : E ′ → Rk+1 with homotopy fibre
S d−k−1 is controlled homeomorphic to this projection π. This is shown in [Cha81].                □

5.2. K-theoretic obstructions to approximate fibering. To apply the results of the preceding
subsection in practice, we need techniques to construct approximate fibrations over the product of a
closed manifold M with R. One way to produce approximate fibrations over M × R is to construct an
approximate fibration over M ×S 1 , and pulling back along the infinite cyclic cover M ×R → M ×S 1 .
This motivates the following.

Definition 5.2.1. A closed aspherical manifold M k has the approximate fibering property if for each
map p : E d → M k , d ≥ 5 which is surjective on fundamental groups and has compact homotopy
fibres, the map
                                   p × S1 : E × S1 → M × S1
is homotopic to an approximate fibration.

Theorem 5.2.2 (Farrell–Lück–Steimle). Let M be an aspherical manifold whose fundamental group is
word-hyperbolic and which admits a PL-structure. Then M has the approximate fibering property.

   Since this theorem does not appear verbatim in [FLS18], we deduce it from the results therein
below. We note that we believe that the results of this and the preceding subsection justify revisiting
the theory of approximate fibrations, and to understand analogs of Theorem 5.2.2 for more general
base spaces. For example, it would be interesting to remove the PL-hypothesis, or to have a useful
obstruction theory for non-aspherical base spaces.

Recollections 5.2.3. Compact manifolds are ENRs. A homotopy equivalence h : X → Y of com-
pact ENRs has a Whitehead torsion τ (h) ∈ Wh(X) in the Whitehead group of X. For a homo-
topy equivalence h : X → Y of ENRs, and another ENR Z with zero Euler characteristic, one has
0 = τ (h × Z : X × Z → Y × Z), see [Lüc25, Ch. 2].

Proof of Theorem 5.2.2. By [FLS18], the obstruction to finding an approximate fibration in the homo-
topy class of p × S 1 is constructed as follows.
       (1) Construct any factorisation of p × S 1
                                                    h    q
(81)                                     E × S1 −  → M × S1
                                                →P −
           where h is a homotopy equivalence, P a compact ENR and q an approximate fibration.
       (2) Take the Whitehead torsion τ (h) ∈ Wh(E × S 1 ) of the homotopy equivalence h.
                     ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER              26


       (3) Pass to a certain quotient of the Whitehead group, in which the constructed obstruction does
           not depend on any of the choices made above.
We note that it is possible to pick P such that τ (h) = 0 ∈ Wh(E × S 1 ). Namely, pick a factorisation
of p : E → M into
                                                    w   r
                                              E−
                                               →Q−
                                                 →M
where w is a homotopy equivalence, Q an ENR and r an approximate fibration. This is possible by
[FLS18, Thm. 4.1.]. Setting P = Q×S 1 , h = w ×S 1 and q the composite of r ×S 1 with the projection
M × S 1 → M , we note that τ (h) = τ (w × S 1 ) = 0. Since the obstruction to finding an approximate
fibration within the homotopy class of p × S 1 is the image of τ (h) in a quotient of Wh(E × S 1 ), we
see that it vanishes, as desired.                                                                    □

                                          6. The main theorem
    In this section, we combine the results of the previous sections to prove Theorem B, and in fact a
slight refinement, Theorem 6.2.1.

6.1. Manifold structures on the complement. We start with a preliminary step, motivated by the
following. Suppose we have a G-space X equipped with the structure of a finite semifree isovariant
G-Poincaré space, with complement (C, ∂C) and complement quotient (Q, ∂Q). In Theorem 4.5.2
we showed that in the situation relevant for Theorem B, tso(C e , ∂C e ) = 0 implies tso(Q, ∂Q) = 0.
Here, we give the relevant technique to show that tso(C e , ∂C e ) = 0 in our situation. The main result
Lemma 6.1.2 deduces that from the fact that (C, ∂C) is “embedded” in the ambient manifold M , for
which we want to solve the Nielsen realisation problem.
   One way to show that tso(C e , ∂C e ) = 0 is to construct an explicit manifold structure using em-
bedding theory Remark 6.1.3. We give an algebraic argument instead. The results in this subsection
are closely related to a result of Wall [Wal99, Cor. 11.3.1].

Lemma 6.1.1. Consider a pushout of finite spaces

                                               ∂C           C
(82)                                             p           q

                                                U           X
in which (C, ∂C) and (U, ∂C) are d-dimensional oriented Poincaré duality pairs. Then X naturally is
an oriented Poincaré duality space, and in the diagram

(83)                             πd S(X) → πd S(X, U ) ← πd S(C, ∂C)

the elements tso(X) and tso(C, ∂C) have equivalent images.

Proof. See [Wal67] for the statement that X is Poincaré, automatically of the same dimension d as
(C, ∂C). The maps of (83) fit into a commuting diagram as follows.

                            ΩPD
                             d (X)            ΩPD
                                               d (X, U )           ΩPD
                                                                    d (C, ∂C)
(84)

                            πd S(X)           πd S(X, U )          πd S(C, ∂C)

The total surgery obstructions tso(X) and tso(C, ∂C) are the images of the bordism classes id : X →
X and id : (C, ∂C) → (C, ∂C) under the vertical maps. So to prove the statement, it suffices to
                      ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER               27


exhibit a Poincaré bordism of the maps (X, ∅) → (X, U ) and (C, ∂C) → (X, U ). Such a bordism is
given by the explicit diagram

                                          X             X        C
(85)
                                           ∅            U       ∂C
of Poincaré duality pairs with a reference map to the pair of spaces (X, U ).                          □

Lemma 6.1.2. In the situation of Lemma 6.1.1, if p is a π–π-equivalence, tso(X) = 0 implies
tso(C, ∂C) = 0.

Proof. The statement is a consequence of Lemma 6.1.1 and the fact that S(C, ∂C) → S(X, U ) is an
equivalence. To see the latter, it suffices to show that both the maps
(86)            Lq (∗)≥1 ⊗ (C, ∂C) → Lq (∗)≥1 ⊗ (X, U ) and Lq (C, ∂C) → Lq (X, U )
are equivalences. The first is a consequence of excision. For the second, since L(Y, B) ≃
cofib(Lq (B) → Lq (Y )) we note that it follows if we can justify that

                                          Lq (∂C)           Lq (C)
(87)                                           Lq (p)          Lq (q)

                                           Lq (U )          Lq (X)

is cocartesian. By assumption, p is a π–π-equivalence, and hence so is q. But Lq (−) inverts π–π-
equivalences, so both vertical maps in the above square are equivalences, which implies that it is
cocartesian.                                                                                    □

Remark 6.1.3. This remark presents an alternative construction of a manifold structure on (C, ∂C)
under the hypothesis that M hCp in Theorem B is equivalent to a k-dimensional topological manifold
with d ≥ 2k + 4. This shows that tso(C, ∂C) = 0 by a geometric argument, under a stronger
codimension assumption. We include it to illustrate how the algebraic argument presented above
leads to a stronger conclusion.
   In the situation of Theorem B pick a closed topological manifold L homotopy equivalent to M hCp ,
and let k be the dimension of L. Bringing the map L → M induced by the map M hCp → M into
general position, we may assume that L is a locally flat embedded submanifold, using that 2k < d. We
claim that M \ L is the interior of a compact manifold by checking that Siebenmann’s end theorem
applies.
   First, the embedding L ⊂ M defines a Poincaré embedding of L into M . The assumption d ≥ 2k+4
implies by [Kle02, Cor. B] that this Poincaré embedding is concordant to the embedding provided by
the isovariant structure on M . In particular, the end of M \ L identifies with ∂C. Since ∂C is a finite
space, we conclude that indeed Siebenmann’s end theorem applies to show that M \ L is the interior
of a compact manifold M \ L. Then (C, ∂C) ≃ (M \ L, ∂M \ L).

6.2. Putting together.

Theorem 6.2.1. Let M d be an oriented aspherical d-manifold with Farrell–Jones fundamental group π,
and α : G → hAut(M ) an E1 -map. Assume that
       (1) the dimension d is at least six;
       (2) the map α takes values in orientation-preserving automorphisms;
       (3) the orbifold fundamental group O = π1 (MhG ) contains no virtually cyclic subgroups of type II;
                      ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                28


       (4) the Borel G-space XBor associated to (M, α) admits the structure of a finite semifree isovariant
           G-Poincaré duality space;
       (5) the space M hG has the homotopy type of a closed manifold L of dimension at most d − 3, which
           has the approximate fibering property.
Then α refines to a Borel G-action on M .

Proof. Let (C, ∂C) denote the complement of the finite semifree isovariant G-Poincaré structure and
(Q, ∂Q) the complement-quotient. The orientation on M equips (C, ∂C) with an orientation, which
descends to (Q, ∂Q), since α acts orientation-preserving. We show that tso(Q, ∂Q) = 0. The image of
tso(Q, ∂Q) under the transfer map πd S(Q, ∂Q) → πd S(C e , ∂C e ) is tso(C e , ∂C e ). Since tso(M ) =
0, Lemma 6.1.2 shows that tso(C e , ∂C e ) = 0. The transfer is an injective map by Theorem 4.5.2, so
we actually deduce that tso(Q, ∂Q) = 0.
   Since d ≥ 6, we can apply Ranicki’s theorem (recalled in Theorem 3.4.1) to deduce the existence of
a manifold structure (N, ∂N ) ≃ (Q, ∂Q). Pulling back along the G-cover (C, ∂C) → (Q, ∂Q), we
deduce the existence of a G-manifold structure (N , ∂N ) ≃ (C, ∂C).
   Since L has the approximate fibering property, we may find an approximate fibration in the homo-
topy class ∂N × S 1 → L × S 1 . Pulling back along the infinite cyclic cover of S 1 and precomposing
with the Cp -cover of ∂N , we get an approximate fibration
(88)                                              e ×R→L×R
                                             p : ∂N
which is also an equivariant map. Hence, the teardrop construction ∂ N
                                                                     e × R ∪p L is a topological
manifold with G-action. Using an equivariant collar we get an embedding ∂ N
                                                                          e × R ,→ N
                                                                                   e \ ∂Ne.
  We define
(89)                              M ′ := (N
                                          e \ ∂N
                                               e ) ∪ e ∂N
                                                    ∂ N ×R
                                                           e × R ∪p L.

Then M ′ is a topological manifold with G-action. By construction, there is a G-equivariant homotopy
equivalence k : M ′ → XBor . By the Borel conjecture for word-hyperbolic groups, the map k : M ′ →
M is homotopic to a homeomorphism h : M ′ → M . Consider the following diagram of E1 -groups,
where the maps ch denote conjugation with the homeomorphism h, and ck for conjugation with k,
and Homeoδ (−) denotes the homeomorphism group, with the discrete topology.
                          act                    uM ′
                      G         Homeoδ (M ′ )           hAut(M ′ )
(90)                                    ch                   ch
                                                                          ck

                                                 uM                   ≃
                                Homeoδ (M )             hAut(M )                     e
                                                                               hAut(XBor )

The map act is induced by the G-action on M ′ , and the square commutes. Since h and k are homo-
topic, the maps ch , ck : hAut(M ′ ) → hAut(M ) are equivalent, showing that also the right triangle
commutes. Since ck ◦ uM ′ ◦ act identifies with the E1 -map α, we see that ch ◦ act indeed gives a
Cp -action refining α.                                                                            □

Proof of Theorem B. Note that torsionfree word-hyperbolic groups which are not cyclic have trivial
centre, so an E1 -map α : Cp → hAut(M ) is the same as a group map Cp → Out(π). We verify
that the assumptions of Theorem B imply the assumptions of Theorem 6.2.1. Word-hyperbolic groups
are Farrell–Jones groups. If p is odd, then α automatically acts orientation-preserving. If O had a
virtually cyclic subgroup of type II, then O would possess elements of even order. But every finite
subgroup of O is isomorphic to a subgroup of Cp , and none of them have even order. The existence
of the structure of a finite semifree isovariant Cp -Poincaré space is provided by Theorem 2.3.1. The
dimension assumption of a PL-manifold homotopy equivalent to M hCp implies that that dimension
                      ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER               29


is at most d − 3, since (d − 2)/2 ≤ d − 3 holds for d ≥ 6. Finally, word-hyperbolicity of O implies
that the components of L are aspherical PL-manifolds, which have the approximate fibering property
by Theorem 5.2.2.                                                                                □
Recollections 6.2.2. If Γ is a word-hyperbolic group, and F ⊂ Γ a finite subgroup, then the Weyl
group WΓ F is word-hyperbolic as well. Indeed, by [BH99, Prop. III.Γ.3.9], the centraliser CΓ (F ) of
F in Γ is word-hyperbolic. Furthermore, if n ∈ Γ normalises F , then conjugation by n restricts to
an automorphism of F . This action is trivial if and only if n centralises F . This gives rise to an exact
sequence
(91)                                1 → CΓ (F ) → NΓ (F ) → Aut(F ).
Being word-hyperbolic is inherited by finite-index subgroups, finite-index overgroups and quotients
by finite subgroups. Hence, since F and Aut(F ) are finite, NΓ (F ) and WΓ F are word-hyperbolic as
well.

                                       Appendix A. Group theory
   Let π be a torsionfree group and let G be a nontrivial finite group. For this section, we fix an
extension
(92)                                       1 → π → Γ → G → 1.
A subgroup F ⊂ Γ will be called full if the composite F ⊂ Γ → G is an isomorphism. In this
appendix, we make a few group-theoretic observations about such extensions, in particular relating
to the universal space for the family of finite subgroups Efin Γ. Write M for a set of representatives
of the conjugacy classes of full subgroups of Γ.
Lemma A.1. Let F ⊂ Γ be a full subgroup. Then:
       (1) every finite subgroup of NΓ F is contained in F ;
       (2) we have NΓ (NΓ F ) = NΓ F ;
                                                    `
       (3) for each full subgroup H ⊂ Γ, the Γ-set F ∈M Γ/NΓ F has a unique H-fixed point.
Proof. For the first part, if H ⊂ NΓ F is not contained in F , then we see that H and F generate a
subgroup U in Γ that is not contained in F . The composite U ⊂ Γ → G cannot be injective, so
U ∩ π ̸= 1. Furthermore, U is finite as H normalises F , so that each u ∈ U may be written as hf
with h ∈ H and f ∈ F . This is a contradiction, since π is torsionfree. The second part follows from
the first part: if g normalises NΓ F , then g −1 F g is finite, hence equal to F .
   For the third part, we compute that (Γ/NΓ F )H is the set of cosets gNΓ F with g −1 Hg ⊂ NΓ F .
By the first part, g −1 Hg = F . If h also satisfies h−1 Hh = F , we have g −1 hF h−1 g = g −1 Hg = F ,
so h−1 g ∈ NΓ F and gNΓ F = hNΓ F .                                                                 □
Lemma A.2. The following are equivalent.
       (1) Every nontrivial finite subgroup of Γ is contained in a unique full subgroup.
       (2) The universal space Efin Γ admits a model with cells of isotropy type {Γ/F }F ∈M or Γ/e.
       (3) The Γ-set of path components of (Efin Γ)>1 is Γ-isomorphic to F ∈M Γ/NΓ F .
                                                                           `

       (4) The square
                                     `          Γ
                                       F ∈M indNΓ F ENΓ F               EΓ
(93)
                                  `          Γ
                                     F ∈M indNΓ F Efin NΓ F           Efin Γ
          is cocartesian.
                      ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                 30


Proof. To prove (4) =⇒ (2) we observe that a model for Efin NΓ F is given by restricting the action
of WΓ F on EWΓ F along the surjection NΓ F → WΓ F with finite kernel. So Efin NΓ F can be built
from cells of isotropy type NΓ F/F . Now observe that indΓNΓ F (NΓ F/F ) = Γ/F . The implication (1)
=⇒ (4) is a direct computation on fixed points, or follows from [LW12, Cor. 2.11].
   To see that (2) =⇒ (3), we construct two maps
                          a                     f            p  a
(94)                         indΓNΓ F Efin NΓ F −
                                                → Efin Γ>1 −→       Γ/NΓ F.
                           F ∈M                                     F ∈M

The map f is the unique Γ-map. To construct the second map, observe that each Γ-set with full
isotropy groups uniquely maps to F ∈M Γ/NΓ F . By elementary obstruction theory, every Γ-space
                                      `

constructed out of cells with full isotropy groups has a unique map to F ∈M Γ/NΓ F . Thus, by
                                                                               `

assumption we have a unique map p, and we note that the composite pf induces an isomorphism
after applying the functor π0 (−)e . It is left to show that f induces a surjection after applying π0 (−)e
to deduce (3). The assumption guarantees that each x ∈ π0 (−)e is in the image of the unique Γ-map
Γ/F → Efin Γ>1 after applying π0 (−)e for some F ∈ M. Each such map lifts over f by inducting
the unique NΓ F -map NΓ F/F → Efin NΓ F .
    To see that (3) =⇒ (1) let H ⊂ Γ be a nontrivial finite subgroup. There is a unique Γ-map Γ/H →
(Efin Γ)>1 . The assumption implies that H ⊂ NΓ F for some full subgroup. By Lemma A.1, H ⊂
F . If there is a different full subgroup F ′ containing H, then the postcomposition of the projection
maps Γ/H → Γ/F and Γ/H → Γ/F ′ with the unique Γ-map to F ∈M Γ/NΓ F sends eH to
                                                                            `

different points. But the composite factors over (Efin Γ)>1 , and two Γ-maps Γ/H → (Efin Γ)>1 are
homotopic.                                                                                              □
Lemma A.3. Under the equivalent conditions of Lemma A.2, the group Γ satisfies the following.
       (1) When H is a nontrivial finite subgroup and F the unique full subgroup containing it, then
           NΓ H ⊂ NΓ F .
       (2) If V is an infinite, non-torsionfree virtually cyclic subgroup of type I, Vmax its maximal finite
           subgroup, then V is contained in the normaliser of the unique full subgroup containing Vmax .
Proof. Let H be a nontrivial finite subgroup, and g ∈ Γ so that g −1 Hg = H. Then if H ⊂ F and F is
full, also H ⊂ g −1 F g and g −1 F g is full. Therefore, F = g −1 F g so g ∈ NΓ F . For the second point,
note that V ⊂ NΓ Vmax , and that Vmax is nontrivial. Hence, the assertion follows from the first part
of the lemma.                                                                                          □
Lemma A.4. Under the equivalent conditions of Lemma A.2, writing X := π\Efin Γ, we have preferred
equivalences
                                  a
(95)                                  BWΓ F ≃ X G ≃ X >1 .
                                        F ∈M

Furthermore, the map (X )hG → (X e )hG is equivalent to the map
                             G
                                      a
(96)                                       BNΓ F → BΓ
                                            F ∈M

induced by the inclusions NΓ F ⊂ Γ.
Proof. Write NΓπ F = NΓ F ∩ π. The composite of the inclusion with the projection
                                                   i          q
(97)                                      NΓπ F ,−
                                                 → NΓ F −
                                                        → WΓ F
is an isomorphism, and q ∗ EWΓ F ≃ Efin NΓ F . So, using (4) in Lemma A.2 we compute
                   a                            a                         a
(98)     X >1 ≃ π\     indΓNΓ F Efin NΓ F ≃ π\       indΓNΓ F q ∗ EWΓ F ≃     NΓπ F \q ∗ EWΓ F.
                      F ∈M                             F ∈M                     F ∈M
                      ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                  31


It is clear that the residual G-action in the right hand term is trivial, and that the quotient is exactly
BWΓ F . For the second assertion, we similarly apply (−)hΓ to the upper row of the diagram in (4) of
Lemma A.2, which is easily seen to identify with the desired map.                                       □

                              Appendix B. Pairs of spaces with transfers
   The purpose of this appendix is to provide the technical background on the category Stf2 sketched
in §3.3. For adequate categories C we give a procedure for the construction of functors
                                                  F : Stf2 → C.
We rely on general categorical technology from the existing literature. First, we give some generalities.
Recall that given a category X with pullbacks, and two classes of morphisms, one being the class of left
morphisms Xleft , and one the class of right morphisms Xright which are closed under pullbacks and
composition, we can form a category of correspondences Corr(X , Xleft , Xright ). A morphism X 99K Y
                                p     f
in this category is a span X ←
                             −E−  → Y with p ∈ Xleft and f ∈ Xright . For a comprehensive treatment,
see [HHL+23, Sec. 2]. In particular observe that they construct a natural equivalence
(99)                         Corr(X , Xleft , Xright )op ≃ Corr(X , Xright , Xleft ).
Set S 2 = Fun(∆1 , S) to be the category of pairs of spaces. We write generic objects as (X, A) ∈ S 2 .
       (1) Write the classes of equivalences, fold maps, finite coverings and all maps as
                                          equiv ⊂ fold ⊂ fincov ⊂ all.
           The class of fold maps is the class of maps equivalent to (X, A)∪n → (X, A) for some finite
           integer n, and finite coproducts of such maps for varying n. All these classes are stable under
           pullback and composition. We get a chain of wide subcategory inclusions
             S 2 ≃ Corr(S 2 , equiv, all) → Corr(S 2 , fold, all) → Stf2 := Corr(S 2 , fincov, all).
       (2) The category S 2 is extensive in the sense of [BH21, Def. 2.3.]. That is, it admits finite coprod-
           ucts, coproducts are disjoint and finite coproduct decompositions are closed under pullbacks.
                                           (2)
       (3) We write Fin(2) ⊂ S 2 and Fintf ⊂ Stf2 for the full subcategories spanned by pairs of spaces
           (T, S) for which S → T is an injection of finite sets.
                                      (2)
       (4) The categories Stf2 and Fintf are semiadditive, and the functors S 2 → Stf2 as well as Fin(2) →
               (2)
           Fintf preserve finite coproducts, see [BH21, Lem. C.3].
Lemma B.1. Let C be a cocomplete category. The restriction functor
                                                                   (2)
(100)                                     Fun(Stf2 , C) → Fun(Fintf , C)
induces an equivalence between
       (1) those F : Stf2 → C whose restriction to S 2 commutes with colimits;
                          (2)
       (2) those G : Fintf → C whose restriction to Fin(2) commutes with coproducts.
Proof. We observe that Fin(2) ⊂ S 2 satisfies the following: if f : (X, A) → (T, S) is a morphism in
fincov, and (T, S) ∈ Fin(2) , then also (X, A) ∈ Fin(2) . By dualising [BH21, Prop. C.21], this obser-
vation implies that the horizontal restriction maps depicted below fit into a left adjointable diagram.
                                                      L
                                                      e

                                                                     (2)
                                     Fun(Stf2 , C)         Fun(Fintf , C)
                                                      R
                                                      e
(101)                                         p       L             q


                                      Fun(S 2 , C)    R
                                                           Fun(Fin(2) , C)
                    ON THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM FOR CYCLIC GROUPS OF PRIME ORDER                      32


Since Le is a left Kan extension along a fully faithful functor, it is fully faithful. It restricts to a fully
faithful functor L e c on the subcategory of those G : Fin(2) → C such that qG commutes with coprod-
                                                           tf
ucts. We argue that the essential image of L    e c consists of exactly those F for which pF commutes
with colimits.
    So let F : Stf2 → C be so that pF preserves colimits. Then RpF ≃ q e        RF commutes with finite
coproducts. Since q is restriction along a functor which preserves finite products, and furthermore
conservative, we see that also RF  e commutes with finite coproducts. So L         e lies in the essential
                                                                                 e RF
image of L e . It suffices to check that the adjunction counit L
            c                                                     eeRF → F is an equivalence. Since p
is conservative, we may check that pLRF ≃ pF is an equivalence instead. Using the equivalences
                                        e  e
pLeRe ≃ Lq R e ≃ LRp we observe that this is equivalent to the adjunction counit inducing an equiva-
lence LRpF → pF . But if H : S 2 → C commutes with colimits, then LRH → H is an equivalence,
which establishes the claim.                                                                                □

   Note that the functor j : ∆1 → Fin(2) given by the morphism (∅ → ∗) → (∗ → ∗) exhibits the
target as a free coproduct completion of the source.
                                                                             j                 (2)
                                                                  → Fin(2) → Fintf induces an
Lemma B.2. Let C be a semiadditive category. Restriction along ∆1 −
equivalence
                                         (2)
                               Fun∪ (Fintf , C) ≃ Fun(∆1 , C).

Proof. Bachmann-Hoyois [BH21, Prop. C.5] construct an equivalence
                                         (2)
                              Fun∪ (Fintf , C) ≃ Fun∪ (Fin(2) , CMon(C)).
Since C is semiadditive, CMon(C) ≃ C. Combining this with the observation that Fin(2) is the free
coproduct completion of ∆1 yields the claim.                                                   □

   Let C be a cocomplete semiadditive category. We write Funcodesc (Stf2 , C) ⊂ Fun(Stf2 , C) for those
functors whose restriction to S 2 commutes with colimits.

Proposition B.1. Let C be a cocomplete semiadditive category. Restriction along the functors ∆1 ⊂
S 2 → Stf2 induces equivalences of categories
(102)                       Funcodesc (Stf2 , C) ≃ FunL (S 2 , C) ≃ Fun(∆1 , C).

Proof. The first part is a straightforward combination of Lemma B.1 and Lemma B.2, as well as the
fact that ∆1 ⊂ S 2 exhibits the target as the colimit cocompletion of the source.              □

Proposition B.2. Let C be a cocomplete semiadditive category. The inclusion
                                    Funcodesc (Stf2 , C) ⊂ Fun∪ (Stf2 , C)
admits a right adjoint. Its restriction to S 2 is the left Kan extension of its restriction along the composite
∆1 ⊂ S 2 → Stf2 .

Proof. Our considerations identify the inclusion in question with the left adjoint
                                                (2)     L
                                     Fun∪ (Fintf , C) −
                                                      → Fun(Stf2 , C).
                                                        e
                                                                                                            □

   As an application, we derive the classical pull-push formula for the transfer in singular homology.
Letting C = ModZ and considering the functor (Z → Z) : ∆1 → ModZ , Proposition B.1 provides
a functor Z ⊗ (−) : Stf2 → ModZ . Note that, as plain Z-modules we have Z ⊗ (X, A) ≃ Z ⊗
Σ∞ (X+ /A+ ). We will denote the forward functoriality by (−)! and the backward functoriality along
finite covering maps by (−)∗ .
                                               REFERENCES                                              33


Proposition B.3. Let p : (X ′ , A′ ) → (X, A) be an n-sheeted covering of pairs. Then the composite
                                          p∗                p!
(103)                       Z ⊗ (X, A) −→ Z ⊗ (X ′ , A′ ) −→ Z ⊗ (X, A)
is multiplication by n.
Proof. Write S/BΣ
              2
                 n
                   = Fun(∆1 , S/BΣn ), i.e. the category of pairs of spaces (X, A) together with
an n-sheeted covering of pairs (X ′ , A′ ) → (X, A). We have the functor T ∈ Fun(SBΣ2
                                                                                      n
                                                                                        , ModBNZ )
                ′ p
sending ((X , A ) −
            ′
                  → (X, A)) to Z ⊗ (X, A) equipped with the endomorphism p! p . The functor T ′
                                                                                 ∗

sending (X, A) ∈ S/BΣ
                    2
                         n
                           to n ⊗ (X, A) : Z ⊗ (X, A) → Z ⊗ (X, A) preserves colimits as well, and
we want to argue that T ≃ T ′ .
   Note that S/BΣ
              2
                  n
                     is freely generated under colimits by the subcategory ∆1BΣn on objects of the
                      α                            α
shape dα = (∅ → ∗ − → BΣn ) and eα = (∗ → ∗ −    → BΣn ). The restrictions of T and T ′ to ∆1BΣ land
in the 1-category Fun(∆BΣ , Ab) ≃ Fun(∆ , AbBΣn ), where Ab = Mod♡
                        1                   1
                                                                         Z is the category of abelian
                                                            n
groups. Indeed, as Z-modules with BN-action, T (dα ) = (Z − → Z) and T (eα ) = 0, and T ′ takes the
same values. Hence, the restrictions of T and T are equivalent, and since both preserve colimits, we
                                               ′

have T ≃ T ′ .                                                                                     □

                                               References
[BH21]        Tom Bachmann and Marc Hoyois. “Norms in motivic homotopy theory”. In: Astérisque
              425 (2021), pp. ix+207.
[BH99]        Martin R. Bridson and André Haefliger. Metric spaces of non-positive curvature. Vol. 319.
              Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathe-
              matical Sciences]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999, pp. xxii+643.
[BKW26]       Ulrich Bunke, Daniel Kasprowski, and Christoph Winges. “On the Farrell-Jones conjec-
              ture for localising invariants”. In: Adv. Math. 489 (2026), Paper No. 110788, 137.
[BLR08]       Arthur Bartels, Wolfgang Lück, and Holger Reich. “The K-theoretic Farrell-Jones con-
              jecture for hyperbolic groups”. In: Invent. Math. 172.1 (2008), pp. 29–70.
[BW08]        Jonathan Block and Shmuel Weinberger. “On the generalized Nielsen realization prob-
              lem”. In: Comment. Math. Helv. 83.1 (2008), pp. 21–33. issn: 0010-2571,1420-8946. doi:
              10.4171/CMH/116. url: https://doi.org/10.4171/CMH/116.
[CD04]        Francis X. Connolly and James F. Davis. “The surgery obstruction groups of the infinite
              dihedral group”. In: Geom. Topol. 8 (2004), pp. 1043–1078.
[CD77]        D. S. Coram and P. F. Duvall Jr. “Approximate fibrations”. In: Rocky Mountain J. Math.
              7.2 (1977), pp. 275–288.
[CDH+]        Baptiste Calmès, Emanuele Dotto, Yonatan Harpaz, Fabian Hebestreit, Markus Land,
              Kristian Moi, Denis Nardin, Thomas Nikolaus, and Wolfgang Steimle. Hermitian K-
              theory for stable ∞-categories IV: Karoubi—Grothendieck—Witt theory. Forthcoming.
[CDH+23]      Baptiste Calmès, Emanuele Dotto, Yonatan Harpaz, Fabian Hebestreit, Markus Land,
              Kristian Moi, Denis Nardin, Thomas Nikolaus, and Wolfgang Steimle. “Hermitian K-
              theory for stable infinity-categories I: Foundations”. In: Selecta Mathematica 29.1 (2023).
[CDH+25]      Baptiste Calmès, Emanuele Dotto, Yonatan Harpaz, Fabian Hebestreit, Markus Land,
              Kristian Moi, Denis Nardin, Thomas Nikolaus, and Wolfgang Steimle. “Hermitian K-
              theory for stable ∞-categories II: Cobordism categories and additivity”. In: Acta Math.
              235.2 (2025), pp. 149–400.
                                            REFERENCES                                               34


[CDH+26]   Baptiste Calmès, Emanuele Dotto, Yonatan Harpaz, Fabian Hebestreit, Markus Land,
           Kristian Moi, Denis Nardin, Thomas Nikolaus, and Wolfgang Steimle. “Hermitian K-
           theory for stable ∞-categories III: Grothendieck-Witt groups of rings”. In: Ann. of Math.
           (2) 204.1 (2026), pp. 119–220.
[CDK14]    Frank Connolly, James F. Davis, and Qayum Khan. “Topological rigidity and H1 -negative
           involutions on tori”. In: Geom. Topol. 18.3 (2014), pp. 1719–1768.
[CDK15]    Frank Connolly, James F. Davis, and Qayum Khan. “Topological rigidity and actions on
           contractible manifolds with discrete singular set”. In: Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. Ser. B 2
           (2015), pp. 113–133.
[Cha81]    T. A. Chapman. “Approximation results in topological manifolds”. In: Mem. Amer. Math.
           Soc. 34.251 (1981), pp. iii+64.
[DL24]     James F. Davis and Wolfgang Lück. “On Nielsen realization and manifold models for
           classifying spaces”. In: Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 377.11 (2024), pp. 7557–7600.
[DL98]     James F. Davis and Wolfgang Lück. “Spaces over a category and assembly maps in iso-
           morphism conjectures in K- and L-theory”. In: K-Theory 15.3 (1998), pp. 201–252.
[FL04]     F. T. Farrell and J.-F. Lafont. “Finite automorphisms of negatively curved Poincaré duality
           groups”. In: Geom. Funct. Anal. 14.2 (2004), pp. 283–294.
[FLS18]    Tom Farrell, Wolfgang Lück, and Wolfgang Steimle. “Approximately fibering a manifold
           over an aspherical one”. In: Math. Ann. 370.1-2 (2018), pp. 669–726. issn: 0025-5831,1432-
           1807. doi: 10.1007/s00208-017-1535-1. url: https://doi.org/10.
           1007/s00208-017-1535-1.
[HHL+23]   Rune Haugseng, Fabian Hebestreit, Sil Linskens, and Joost Nuiten. “Two-variable fibra-
           tions, factorisation systems and infinity-categories of spans”. In: Forum Math. Sigma 11
           (2023), Paper No. e111, 70.
[HKK24a]   Kaif Hilman, Dominik Kirstein, and Christian Kremer. Equivariant Poincaré duality for
           cyclic groups of prime order and the Nielsen realisation problem. 2024. arXiv: 2409 .
           02220 [math.AT]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.02220.
[HKK24b]   Kaif Hilman, Dominik Kirstein, and Christian Kremer. Parametrised Poincaré duality
           and equivariant fixed points methods. 2024. arXiv: 2405.17641 [math.AT]. url:
           https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17641.
[HLL+21]   Fabian Hebestreit, Markus Land, Wolfgang Lück, and Oscar Randal-Williams. “A van-
           ishing theorem for tautological classes of aspherical manifolds”. In: Geom. Topol. 25.1
           (2021), pp. 47–110.
[HTW+00]   Bruce Hughes, Laurence R. Taylor, Shmuel Weinberger, and Bruce Williams. “Neighbor-
           hoods in stratified spaces with two strata”. In: Topology 39.5 (2000), pp. 873–919.
[HTW90]    C.B. Hughes, L.R. Taylor, and E.B. Williams. “Bundle theories for topological manifolds”.
           In: (1990).
[KK25]     Dominik Kirstein and Christian Kremer. “Semifree Isovariant Poincaré Spaces and the
           Gap Condition”. In: (2025). arXiv: 2510 . 23318 [math.AT]. url: https : / /
           arxiv.org/abs/2510.23318.
[Kle02]    John R. Klein. “Poincaré duality embeddings and fibrewise homotopy theory. II”. In: Q.
           J. Math. 53.3 (2002), pp. 319–335.
[KPT26a]   Sungkyung Kang, JungHwan Park, and Masaki Taniguchi. “Exotic Dehn twists and ho-
           motopy coherent group actions”. In: Invent. Math. 243.1 (2026), pp. 209–241.
[KPT26b]   Sungkyung Kang, JungHwan Park, and Masaki Taniguchi. Non-kinetic homotopy coher-
           ent actions on four-manifolds. 2026. arXiv: 2607.24548 [math.GT]. url: https:
           //arxiv.org/abs/2607.24548.
                                             REFERENCES                                               35


[KR26]     Manuel Krannich and Oscar Randal-Williams. Some homotopy coherent finite group ac-
           tions on spheres. 2026. arXiv: 2607.15979 [math.AT]. url: https://arxiv.
           org/abs/2607.15979.
[Kre25]    Christian Kremer. “Borel actions in nonpositively curved geometry and the Nielsen re-
           alisation problem”. In: (2025). arXiv: 2510.21550 [math.GT]. url: https://
           arxiv.org/abs/2510.21550.
[KV25]     Christian Kremer and Marco Volpe. Approximate Fibrations in Higher Topos Theory. 2025.
           arXiv: 2510.24629 [math.GT]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.
           24629.
[LNS23]    Markus Land, Thomas Nikolaus, and Marco Schlichting. “L-theory of C ∗ -algebras”. In:
           Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (3) 127.5 (2023), pp. 1451–1506.
[LNS25]    Jordan Levin, Guglielmo Nocera, and Victor Saunier. A model for the assembly map of
           bordism-invariant functors. 2025. arXiv: 2506.05238 [math.KT]. url: https:
           //arxiv.org/abs/2506.05238.
[Lüc]     Wolfgang Lück. “On Brown’s problem, Poincaré models for the classifying spaces for
           proper actions and Nielsen realization”. In: Journal of Topology and Analysis 0.0 (0), pp. 1–
           60.
[Lüc25]   Wolfgang Lück. Isomorphism conjectures in K- and L-theory. Vol. 78. Ergebnisse der
           Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete. 3. Folge. A Series of Modern Surveys in Mathe-
           matics [Results in Mathematics and Related Areas. 3rd Series. A Series of Modern Sur-
           veys in Mathematics]. With contributions by Christoph Winges. Springer, Cham, 2025,
           pp. xxi+874.
[Lüc89]   Wolfgang Lück. Transformation Groups and Algebraic K-Theory. First. Lecture Notes in
           Mathematics. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 1989, pp. XIV, 454.
[LW12]     Wolfgang Lück and Michael Weiermann. “On the classifying space of the family of vir-
           tually cyclic subgroups”. In: Pure Appl. Math. Q. 8.2 (2012), pp. 497–555.
[Nic24]    John Nicholson. “Cancellation for (G, n)-complexes and the Swan finiteness obstruc-
           tion”. In: Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN 16 (2024), pp. 11832–11864.
[Nie32]    Jakob Nielsen. “Untersuchungen zur Topologie der geschlossenen zweiseitigen Flächen.
           III”. In: Acta Math. 58.1 (1932), pp. 87–167.
[Ran92]    A. A. Ranicki. Algebraic L-theory and topological manifolds. Vol. 102. Cambridge Tracts
           in Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1992, pp. viii+358.
[Rei19]    Jens Reinhold. “Tautological classes and smooth bundles over BSU(2)”. In: Proc. Amer.
           Math. Soc. 147.2 (2019), pp. 885–895.
[RS77]     Frank Raymond and Leonard L. Scott. “Failure of Nielsen’s theorem in higher dimen-
           sions”. In: Arch. Math. (Basel) 29.6 (1977), pp. 643–654.
[Wal67]    C. Terence C. Wall. “Poincaré Complexes: I”. In: Annals of Mathematics 86.2 (1967),
           pp. 213–245.
[Wal99]    C. T. C. Wall. Surgery on compact manifolds. Second. Vol. 69. Mathematical Surveys and
           Monographs. Edited and with a foreword by A. A. Ranicki. American Mathematical So-
           ciety, Providence, RI, 1999, pp. xvi+302. isbn: 0-8218-0942-3.
[Win]      Christoph Winges. Forthcoming.
