             Ambiently homeomorphic isolated hypersurfaces
                     of multiplicities two and three
                                               OpenAI

                                        September 24, 2026


                                               Abstract
           We give a negative answer to the embedded Zariski multiplicity conjecture. We
       construct two reduced hypersurface germs that are ambiently homeomorphic but have
       multiplicities two and three. Both have isolated singularities and lie in a common complex
       affine space of dimension divisible by eight. Their defining function germs are also
       topologically right equivalent, and the same examples answer Arnold’s corank problem
       negatively for ambient topological equivalence.


1      The multiplicity problem
For a nonzero convergent power series f ∈ C{z1 , . . . , zN } with f (0) = 0, the order ord0 f is
the least total degree of a monomial with nonzero coefficient. When f is reduced, this integer
is the multiplicity of the hypersurface germ V (f ) = {f = 0}. Two such germs are ambiently
homeomorphic if a homeomorphism between neighborhoods of the origin in CN fixes the
origin and carries one hypersurface to the other. Zariski’s multiplicity question asks whether
this embedded topological equivalence determines multiplicity [41]. It asks, in particular,
whether topology can distinguish a hypersurface with a nonzero quadratic term from one
whose first nonzero terms are cubic.
    For an irreducible plane curve, the classical relation between embedded topology and
the characteristic data of a branch determines its multiplicity [40]. Summing the branch
multiplicities gives the same conclusion for a reduced plane curve. In every ambient dimension,
the A’Campo–Lê theorem shows that a reduced hypersurface germ ambiently homeomorphic
to a smooth one is itself smooth [1, 13]; see [31, Theorem 2.2]. Thus multiplicity one
cannot occur in an unequal-multiplicity pair. Eyral surveys the multiplicity problem and
its further positive cases [5]. In higher dimensions, the Milnor fibration gives powerful
topological invariants of an isolated singularity [17]. Its integral middle homology carries both
a monodromy operator and a Seifert form. The latter records linking of cycles in neighboring
fibers and, in a suitable high-dimensional range, classifies the embedded link. Multiplicity,
by contrast, is read directly from the lowest-degree terms of an equation. Our construction
separates these two kinds of information.
    A polynomial is weighted homogeneous with positive rational weights if there are positive
integers a1 , . . . , aN , d such that f (ta1 z1 , . . . , taN zN ) = td f (z); the normalized weights are
wi = ai /d. We prove the following existence statement.

Theorem 1.1. There is a finite integer N > 3, divisible by eight, and there are reduced
polynomials f1 , f2 ∈ R[z1 , . . . , zN ], weighted homogeneous for positive rational weights, such
that:
    (i) each fj has an isolated critical point at the origin;


                                                    1
 (ii) ord0 f1 = 2 and ord0 f2 = 3;
 (iii) there is a homeomorphism germ of ambient pairs
                                                   ∼ (CN , V (f2 ), 0).
                                 (CN , V (f1 ), 0) =

    Theorem 1.1 gives a negative answer to the embedded Zariski multiplicity conjecture. A
single finite ambient dimension suffices for this purpose. The construction determines such a
dimension by exact integer arithmetic; it is not intended to minimize it.
    The same examples settle the corresponding questions for topological right equivalence.
Holomorphic function germs f, g : (CN , 0) → (C, 0) are topologically right equivalent if
f = g ◦φ for a homeomorphism germ φ : (CN , 0) → (CN , 0). The right-topological multiplicity
conjecture asks whether reduced germs related in this way have equal multiplicities; its mod-
two version asks only for equal multiplicity parity [31, Conjecture 2 and Conjecture Z mod 2].
Corollary 6.4 gives negative answers to both questions for the pair in Theorem 1.1. The
source homeomorphism there may differ from the ambient map constructed below and is not
claimed to be holomorphic or bi-Lipschitz.
    A further consequence concerns Arnold’s corank problem. For a holomorphic germ
f : (CN , 0) → (C, 0) with a critical point at the origin, write

                              corank0 (f ) = N − rankC Hess0 (f ),

where Hess0 (f ) is the Hessian matrix at the origin. Arnold’s question asks whether this
number is preserved when a homeomorphism germ of (CN , 0) carries V (f ) to V (g) for reduced
holomorphic germs f, g with critical points at the origin [32, Problem 1]. Corollary 6.3 gives
a negative answer, even for the isolated weighted homogeneous germs with real coefficients in
Theorem 1.1.
    The examples also answer a question about the lowest-degree part of a function. For
a nonzero holomorphic germ g vanishing at the origin, let g∗ denote its lowest nonzero
homogeneous component for ordinary total degree. Its initial-form Milnor fibre has the
homotopy type of the global unit fibre g∗−1 (1); the full polynomial g∗ is retained, even when it
is nonreduced [3, Proposition 1.6 in arXiv v3]. Motivated by the relationship between contact
loci and monodromy, Budur, Fernández de Bobadilla, Lê, and Nguyen conjectured that
these fibres are homotopy equivalent for embedded topologically equivalent function germs [3,
Conjecture 1.7 in arXiv v3]. Sampaio studies the explicit right-equivalence formulation [31,
Conjecture 4]. Corollary 6.5 disproves both formulations after adding one common square:
the germs fj (z) + t2 in CN +1 remain topologically right equivalent and have isolated critical
points, but their initial-form Milnor fibres are connected and have two connected components,
respectively. Even their zeroth integral homology groups are therefore different.

Families, metric equivalence, and the present question
The question for an arbitrary pair must be distinguished from multiplicity in a family. Lê and
Ramanujam showed that a one-parameter holomorphic deformation of isolated hypersurface
singularities with constant Milnor number is topologically constant when the ambient complex
dimension differs from three [14]. In the excluded case C3 , the companion [21, Theorem 1.1]
proves, after shrinking, topological right-triviality for holomorphic one-parameter families
ft with ft (0) = 0, an isolated critical point at the origin for every t, and constant µ(ft , 0).
Greuel and O’Shea proved equimultiplicity for the corresponding deformation problem
at an isolated quasihomogeneous singularity [8, 24]. Fernández de Bobadilla and Pełka
subsequently established equimultiplicity for continuous families with finite constant Milnor
number, including coefficientwise continuous families of formal power series [7, Theorem 1.1

                                                2
and Corollary 1.3]. Their Example 8.6 gives topologically equivalent germs in C4 , both of
multiplicity two, that cannot be joined by a continuous µ-constant family. They obtain the
embedded equivalence by adding two independent squares to plane-curve germs with the
same integral Seifert form, a precedent for the passage from integral forms to embedded
topology used here. Thus an arbitrary equivalent pair does not reduce to the family problem.
The two different multiplicities in Theorem 1.1 therefore preclude a connecting µ-constant
family.
    There are also positive results for pairs under additional geometric hypotheses. Yau
established multiplicity invariance for pairs of isolated quasihomogeneous surface singularities
in C3 [39, Theorem C], crediting the detailed proofs jointly with Xu in the article’s added
note. Metric and low-dimensional hypotheses give further positive results. Fernandes, Jelonek,
and Sampaio proved that multiplicity two is preserved by ambient bi-Lipschitz equivalence,
and that Hessian corank is preserved by ambient homeomorphisms in three complex variables
[6, Corollary 3.5 and Theorem 4.4]. The homeomorphism in Theorem 1.1 is topological and
its ambient dimension is larger than three. Sampaio’s more recent corank-parity theorem
gives an ambient topological invariant in every dimension [32, Theorem 4.1]. Corollary 6.3
is consistent with this theorem: the two Hessian ranks are even, so the unequal coranks
have the same parity. These comparisons describe the precise topological setting of the
counterexample.

The main ideas
The main difficulty is to preserve different ordinary orders while making the integral Seifert
forms coincide. We compare the spectra, finite multisets of rational exponents whose
exponentials give the monodromy eigenvalues. Equality of spectra alone does not accomplish
the desired integral identification. For the isolated weighted homogeneous singularities
considered here, in a fixed ambient dimension, the spectrum determines the real Seifert form,
through the work of Steenbrink and Némethi [2, 18, 35, 36]. For sums of chain singularities, the
integral-monodromy results of Hertling and Mase, building on Orlik and Randell, separately
determine the integral module with its monodromy operator [10, 22, 23]. The two resulting
identifications need not be compatible. The arithmetic part of the proof produces a single
integral map preserving the whole Seifert form.

1. Seeds from a finite relation. We begin with two multiplicative identities among
explicitly specified positive rational numbers. A finite valuation matrix certifies an integer
relation whose coefficient sum is positive. A decreasing integer-remainder construction
completes each required weight to an isolated chain polynomial. The two collections of chains
have different numbers of variables; balancing the difference by squares on one side produces
multiplicity two there, while common cubes give multiplicity three on the other. The product
identities and a triple-angle identity show that the spectra agree modulo two. The two
classical classification results just described then supply a real Seifert-form isometry and an
integral monodromy-module isomorphism (Section 3).

2. Compatible local and rational forms. After adding common fifth and seventh powers,
the monodromy has finite odd order and no eigenvalue one. In even ambient dimension, this
permits an integral symmetrization of each Seifert form that retains the monodromy and
recovers the original form. We prove that a first tensor square of these symmetric data has
equivariant isometries over every Zℓ . At odd primes, square roots and sums of two squares
in a finite operator algebra produce the maps. At two, the operator splits the lattice into



                                               3
dual pairs and unramified hermitian modules. A quadratic-form local–global argument then
supplies an equivariant rational isometry (Section 4).

3. A single integral isometry. The rational map and the local maps can still differ by
nontrivial eigenspace determinants. Real coefficients provide integral involutions reversing
monodromy. A second tensor square pairs each map with its conjugate by these involutions;
an exact determinant calculation cancels the discrepancies on every eigenspace. Six common
cubic variables make every relevant hermitian form indefinite. Two further common pure
powers, of degrees eleven and thirteen, eliminate real eigenvalues. The determinant-one
isometry group is now a product of special unitary groups. The strong-approximation method
of Eichler, Kneser, and Platonov [25–27] gives a rational group element meeting all prescribed
local lattice conditions, and hence an integral Seifert-form isometry (Section 5).

4. From forms to ambient germs. The Thom–Sebastiani theorem and Sakamoto’s
integral Seifert-form formula realize the tensor operations by polynomial sums in disjoint
variables [30, 33]. The last two pure powers also force det(1 − T ) = 1 for the final monodromy
T . The links are thus homotopy spheres, and the Milnor fibration verifies that they are simple
knots. Levine’s classification converts the integral Seifert congruence into embedded link
equivalence [15]. Weighted radial coordinates extend that equivalence to a homeomorphism
of ambient germs (Section 6). Figure 1 collects these stages and their distinct outputs.
    Section 6 then applies the results of King and Saeki to obtain topological right equivalence.
Real coefficients remove the complex-conjugation alternative in that transfer [12, 28, 31].
Adding a square in one new variable preserves right equivalence and gives the different
connectedness of the initial-form Milnor fibres.

                      Arithmetic relations and chain polynomials
                      Equal spectra modulo 2; ordinary orders 2 and 3.
                                            ⇓
                            Two separate seed identifications
                  Real Seifert forms and integral monodromy modules.
                           ⇓ common fifth and seventh powers;
                           symmetrize and take one tensor square
                    Equivariant isometries over Q and every Zℓ
            A second tensor square cancels their eigenspace determinant defects.
                   ⇓ common cubic, eleventh, and thirteenth powers
                           One integral Seifert-form isometry
                 Indefinite special unitary groups and strong approximation.
                 ⇓ simple spherical knots and weighted radial coordinates
                    Ambiently homeomorphic hypersurface germs
                   Disjoint sums preserve the two different ordinary orders.

Figure 1: The proof keeps analytic order separate from the successive identifications of
topological data. The two seed identifications are independent; the local and global arithmetic
makes them compatible.

   Section 2 fixes the conventions and exact classical inputs. Appendix A contains the
complete integer program for the finite rank certificate; a separately supplied exact relation
can be verified by trial division alone. All construction, local algebra, determinant calculations,


                                                4
and the passage from local lattices to an integral map are proved in the text. The classical
singularity-theoretic, arithmetic, and topological classification theorems are invoked after
checking their hypotheses.

Conventions
Every sum combining singularities uses disjoint sets of variables. Superscript [i] marks a fresh
copy of a polynomial. An isometry of lattices with operators is required to intertwine those
operators. The transpose of a matrix is M t . A lattice is a finite-rank free abelian group; a
bilinear form is unimodular if its determinant is ±1.


2     Classical inputs and conventions
This section records the classical results used below, together with their hypotheses and the
conventions needed to apply them.

2.1    Milnor lattices, spectra, and integral monodromy
Theorem 2.1 (Milnor). Let s ≥ 2, and let f : (Cs , 0) → (C, 0) be a holomorphic germ
with an isolated critical point at 0, with f (0) = 0. For sufficiently small ε > 0, the link
Kf = f −1 (0) ∩ Sε2s−1 is a smooth closed manifold of dimension 2s − 3, and

                                   f /|f | : Sε2s−1 \ Kf −→ S 1

is a locally trivial fibration. Each fiber is the interior of its closure Ff , a compact manifold
with boundary Kf . Both Ff and its interior are homotopy equivalent to a finite bouquet of
(s − 1)-spheres. The link is (s − 3)-connected.

    See [17, Theorems 4.8, 5.2, and 6.5, and Lemma 6.1]. The free group Lf = H      e s−1 (Ff ; Z)
is the Milnor lattice; for a one-variable power we use the reduced zeroth homology of its
finite Milnor fiber. The unimodular integral Seifert form is Sf (x, y) = lk(x, y + ), where the
second cycle is pushed positively to a neighboring page. We use column vectors and fix the
monodromy convention
                                     Mf = (−1)s Sf−1 Sft .                                  (2.1)
This amounts to using the inverse of the monodromy in the convention Sf (M x, y) =
(−1)s Sf (y, x); see [2, Section 6, Equations (6.1)–(6.2)]. Inverting monodromy through-
out preserves every comparison made below. An isomorphism of Seifert forms means integral
congruence unless a different coefficient field or ring is specified.

Theorem 2.2 (Thom–Sebastiani–Sakamoto). Suppose f and g have isolated critical points
in a and b variables, respectively. There is an isomorphism of integral lattices

                                       Lf +g ∼
                                             = Lf ⊗Z Lg

under which
                        Mf +g ∼
                              = Mf ⊗ M g ,       Sf +g ∼
                                                       = (−1)ab Sf ⊗ Sg .
The assertion includes one-variable powers, with reduced zeroth homology.

    The tensor-product monodromy theorem originates with Sebastiani and Thom [33]. The
integral Seifert-form formula is [30, Theorem 2, p. 715]; the lattice and monodromy formulas
are also recorded in [2, Section 6, Equations (6.3)–(6.5)]. Thus comparisons of sums with the
same factor dimensions have the same overall tensor sign.

                                                5
    A polynomial has normalized positive weights w1 , . . . , ws ∈ Q>0 if f (λw1 z1 , . . . , λws zs ) =
λf (z), understood after clearing denominators. We use positive spectral exponents β ∈ (0, s),
shifted by 1 from the convention with spectrum in (−1, s − 1).

Theorem 2.3 (Weighted homogeneous spectrum). If f is weighted homogeneous of normalized
degree 1 and has an isolated critical point, its spectral polynomial is
                                                                  s
                                               X
                                                             β
                                                                  Y twj − t
                                 Pf (t) =                t =                      .               (2.2)
                                                                        1 − twj
                                            β∈Sp+ (f )            j=1


Exponents are counted with multiplicity. Their classes modulo Z determine the eigenvalues
of Mf by exponentiation, with a fixed choice of sign in the exponent. The operator Mf has
finite order.

   Here is the algebraic conversion from the usual spectrum formula to (2.2). Steenbrink’s
                                                                            P
monomial formula [36, Section 1, Examples, p. 165] assigns exponent j (kj + 1)wj to a
monomial z k in a homogeneous basis of C[z1 , . . . , zs ]/(∂f ). The derivatives have degrees
1 − wj and form a regular sequence: their common zero set is the origin, so the ideal has
height s in the Cohen–Macaulay polynomial ring [37, Tags 00ND and 02JN]. The local
regular-sequence criterion applies at the homogeneous maximal ideal; positive grading detects
regularity there. Successive multiplication exact sequences therefore give

                                                                Y 1 − t1−wj
                                Hilb C[z]/(∂f ), t =                              .
                                                                 j
                                                                     1 − twj
                    P
                        w
Multiplication by t j j yields (2.2). Finally, the weighted coordinate rotation zj 7→ e2πiwj zj
represents geometric monodromy; a common multiple of the weight denominators kills this
rotation. Finite-order operators in characteristic zero are semisimple.

Theorem 2.4 (Real Seifert forms from the spectrum). Let f and g be isolated weighted
homogeneous singularities in the same number of variables. If their multisets of positive
spectral exponents agree modulo 2Z, their real Seifert forms are isomorphic.

    For clarity, this is a consequence of the spectral-pair classification, not an assertion about
integral forms. Némethi’s theorem [18, Theorem 6.5] and [2, Theorem 4.4(b)] say that spectral
pairs modulo 2Z in the first coordinate, together with the dimension, determine the real
Seifert form. In the present semisimple case the nilpotent logarithm is zero. Put m = s − 1.
The actual cohomological weight is m away from eigenvalue 1 and m + 1 at eigenvalue 1;
the definition of spectral pairs subtracts the latter shift, so every second coordinate is m.
Thus this coordinate supplies no additional data. Translation β 7→ β − 1 respects equality
modulo 2Z, and the normalization and passage from cohomology to homology depend only
on s. More explicitly, the singularity construction gives a signed Steenbrink polarized mixed
Hodge structure, whose defining replacement of the nilpotent logarithm by its negative leaves
the data unchanged when that logarithm is zero [2, Definition 6.1 and Remark 6.2]. In
that convention the normalized cohomological Seifert form is (−1)(m+1)(m+2)/2 times the
dual homological Seifert form [2, Equation (6.14)]. The common sign and duality preserve
isomorphism. This proves the stated consequence, including the eigenvalue-1 part.

Theorem 2.5 (Hertling–Mase). Suppose f is a sum of chains
                                                a
                             xa11 x2 + · · · + xr−1
                                                 r−1
                                                     xr + xar r ,           ai ≥ 2,



                                                     6
including chains with r = 1. Write the characteristic polynomial of Mf as
                                                                                         Q          cd , where
                                                                                         d Φd (t)
Φd is cyclotomic. Then, as an integral module with operator t = Mf ,

                                    Mcd
                                   max
                    (Lf , Mf ) ∼
                                                                      Y
                               =          Z[t]/ pj (t) ,    pj (t) =           Φd (t).                   (2.3)
                                   j=1                                 cd ≥j

In particular, the eigenvalues with multiplicity determine this integral monodromy module
within the indicated class of singularities.
   Orlik formulated the integral-monodromy decomposition [22]; the chain calculation of
Orlik and Randell [23] is a predecessor of the standard decomposition proved by Hertling
and Mase. The precise result used here is [10, Theorem 1.3(a), (c), (d), and Definition 2.6].
Reversing the variables puts our chains in that paper’s convention. Each standard block
has an integral cyclic generator, hence is exactly the companion module displayed in (2.3).
Inverting its operator preserves cyclicity and its characteristic polynomial, whose roots are
invariant under inversion. Thus (2.1) causes no change to the conclusion. This theorem
controls the lattice with monodromy; it does not identify the integral Seifert form.

2.2   Arithmetic inputs
For a number field F , write Fv for its completion at a place v.
Theorem 2.6 (Hasse–Minkowski). Two nondegenerate quadratic forms over a number field
F are isometric over F if and only if they are isometric over Fv for every place v, including
the archimedean places.
    We use the number-field form of the theorem; see [16, Theorem 25.64(c) and the following
discussion]; see also [20, Chapter VI].
Theorem 2.7 (Strong approximation). Let G be a connected, simply connected, absolutely
                                                             Q
almost simple algebraic group over a number field F . If v|∞ G(Fv ) is noncompact, then
G(F ) is dense in G(AF,f ), the group of finite adelic points.
     See [25, Theorem A, p. 1140], with the correction in [26], and [27, Theorem 2.3, p. 281].
Here the finite adelic group is the restricted product of the G(Fv ) over finite places, with
respect to integral compact open subgroups. Consequently the density concerns approximation
at finitely many places together with integrality at all remaining places. We apply the theorem
to special unitary groups of nondegenerate hermitian forms over a totally imaginary quadratic
extension of a totally real number field. In dimension at least two these groups are connected,
simply connected, and absolutely almost simple; an indefinite archimedean component makes
their archimedean product noncompact. The construction below verifies these hypotheses for
every factor used.

2.3   Embedded high-dimensional topology
Theorem 2.8 (Smale and Levine). A smooth closed manifold of dimension d ≥ 5 that is
homotopy equivalent to S d is homeomorphic to S d .
    Let q ≥ 3, and let K1 , K2 ⊂ S 2q+1 be smooth oriented submanifolds homeomorphic to
S 2q−1 . Suppose the knots are simple, meaning

                π1 (S 2q+1 \ Kj ) ∼
                                  = Z,       πi (S 2q+1 \ Kj ) = 0   (2 ≤ i ≤ q − 1).

If their integral Seifert matrices are congruent, then they are ambiently isotopic. In particular
their embedded sphere pairs are homeomorphic.

                                                   7
    The first assertion is the high-dimensional generalized Poincaré theorem [34, Theorem A,
p. 391]. The second follows from [15, Theorem 3, pp. 185–186]: integral congruence is
a special case of the matrix equivalence in that theorem. Levine’s knots are required to
be homeomorphic to spheres, so exotic smooth sphere structures are allowed. Related
formulations for Milnor fibered links appear in [4], [29, pp. 698–699], and [19, Section 2].
The proof below checks the spherical and simplicity hypotheses directly before applying this
theorem.


3     Two seeds with different orders
We first construct two sums of chains with the same spectrum modulo 2, but with ordinary
orders 2 and 3. The arithmetic ingredient is a finite relation between positive rational
numbers.
Lemma 3.1 (Finite product relation). Set d = 311 and

                                                            d−b                      (2d + b)(2d − b)
        B = {b ∈ Z : 0 < b < d/2, 3 ∤ b},           Ab =        ,          Rb =                       .
                                                             b                        (3d − b)(d + b)
There are integers eb , b ∈ B, such that

                                                          Aebb =         Rbeb = 1.
                                 X                   Y             Y
                          E :=         eb > 0,                                                            (3.1)
                                 b∈B                b∈B            b∈B

Proof. Form the integer matrix with column b consisting of (vp (Ab ))p and (vp (Rb ))p , with
separate rows for the two families of prime valuations. It is enough to find an integer kernel
vector whose coordinate sum is nonzero.
   Here is the finite certificate for this assertion. Retain only the columns for which each of

                            d − b, b, 2d + b, 2d − b, 3d − b, d + b

has no prime factor greater than 4450. Repeatedly delete any column that is the only
column supported on some nonzero row; discard zero rows. The resulting matrix M and its
augmentation M
             f by a final row of ones satisfy

                                                 columns     nonzero valuation rows
                 After the prime cutoff              1118                      1100
                 After all deletions                  896                       867
and
                                          rankF1009 M
                                                    f = 868.                                              (3.2)
Appendix A gives a complete program, using only integer arithmetic and elimination modulo
the prime 1009, that verifies these counts and (3.2). Its sieve stores a prime divisor of every
integer greater than one. Its six signed factor entries are precisely the two valuation columns
above. In the elimination, a normalized pivot is stored for each leading row, so the number of
stored pivots is the rank. Thus the certificate is a finite check of the displayed integer matrix,
without numerical approximation.
    Since M has 867 rows, (3.2) gives an 868-column square submatrix H of M      f whose integer
determinant is nonzero. The vector

                                       z = adj(H)(0, . . . , 0, 1)t

is integral, satisfies the valuation equations on these columns, and has coordinate sum det H.
Extend z by zeros to all columns b ∈ B, and change its overall sign if necessary. This gives

                                                    8
eb with E = | det H| > 0. Every omitted valuation row is zero on the retained columns, so
all prime valuations of both products in (3.1) vanish. A positive rational number with this
property is 1, proving the Lemma.

    The adjugate prescription also makes the construction entirely finite: one may select
the lexicographically first nonsingular minor, with columns ordered by b and valuation rows
ordered by family and prime. No bound on the size of its coefficients is needed.

Lemma 3.2 (Completing one weight to a chain). Let D be a positive odd integer and let
c ∈ Z satisfy 0 < c < D/2. There is a chain polynomial
                                                           a
                                 Fc = xa11 x2 + · · · + xℓ−1
                                                          ℓ−1
                                                              xℓ + xaℓ ℓ                         (3.3)

of weighted degree 1, whose first weight is c/D, all of whose weights are positive and less than
1/2, and all of whose ordinary monomial degrees are at least 3. It has an isolated critical
point at the origin. Removing its first variable and first monomial gives a chain with exactly
the remaining weights, when ℓ > 1.

Proof. Set c1 = c and successively perform the divisions

                                ai = ⌊D/ci ⌋,          ci+1 = D − ai ci ,

stopping at the first zero remainder. Each nonzero remainder is a positive integer strictly
smaller than its predecessor, so this procedure terminates. Give xi weight ci /D. Then
ai ci + ci+1 = D for each nonterminal term, and aℓ cℓ = D for the terminal term. All ai ≥ 2.
Consequently each nonterminal monomial has ordinary degree ai + 1 ≥ 3. The terminal
exponent divides the odd integer D and exceeds 2, so it too is at least 3.
     To prove isolation, suppose a nonzero point is critical and let j be the first index with
xj ̸= 0. If j = ℓ, the derivative in xj is aℓ xaℓ ℓ −1 ̸= 0. Otherwise that derivative forces xj+1 = 0,
                                                                                     a
because the preceding coordinate is zero. The derivative in xj+1 is then xj j ̸= 0: its other
term vanishes since aj+1 ≥ 2. Both cases contradict criticality. The same reasoning applies
to the tail, which has the stated weights.

Proposition 3.3 (The seeds). There are real-coefficient weighted homogeneous polynomials
p1 , p2 , each in an even number s0 of variables, such that:
   1. both are sums, in disjoint variables, of chains with exponents at least 2, and both have
      isolated critical points;
   2. ord0 p1 = 2 and ord0 p2 = 3;
   3. their spectral multisets are equal modulo 2;
   4. their real Seifert forms are isomorphic, and, separately, their integral monodromy
      modules are isomorphic;
   5. both monodromy operators have order dividing D = 312 .

Proof. Fix the integers in Lemma 3.1, and put D = 3d. The four weights below are chosen
for the triple-angle identity in the spectral comparison; their signed counts will give side 2 an
excess of 4E variables, to be balanced by squares on side 1. Start with two lists of weights
prescribed by the following signed counts; a positive entry means that many variables on side
2, and a negative entry means its absolute value on side 1:

                     w                    b/d b/(3d) (d − b)/(3d) (d + b)/(3d)
                                                                                                 (3.4)
    count on side 2 minus count on side 1 2eb  −2eb           2eb         2eb .

                                                   9
All these weights are positive and less than 1/2. Their numerators with denominator D are
3b, b, d − b, d + b, respectively.
    Realize each occurrence of a starting weight c/D by its own copy of the chain in Lemma 3.2.
On the opposite side insert an independent copy of the tail of that chain, doing nothing there
if the tail is empty. The added tail weights occur equally on both sides. All variables used
for different copies are disjoint. Thus this operation realizes the signed weight counts exactly
by sums of isolated chains, and all its monomials have degree at least 3.
    The variable excess on side 2 is 4E. Add 4E independent squares to side 1, giving both
sides the same number of variables. Every starting multiplicity in (3.4) is even, as is the
number of copies of each tail, and 4E is even. Both variable counts are therefore even already.
Finally add two independent pure cubes to each side, and call the resulting polynomials p1 , p2 .
They have the same even number s0 of variables. Sums in disjoint variables have critical
loci equal to products of the individual critical loci, so both critical points are isolated. All
coefficients can be taken to be 1. Squares occur only in p1 , and the common cubes occur in
both polynomials, proving the asserted ordinary orders.
    We next compare the spectra. In the convention of Theorem 2.3, write
                                        X                     Y          tw − t
                           Pp (t) =               tα =                          .          (3.5)
                                          +              w a weight of p
                                                                         1 − tw
                                      α∈Sp (p)


All exponents lie in (2D)−1 Z. Reduction modulo 2 puts their multiplicities in the group
algebra of the finite cyclic group (2D)−1 Z/2Z. Its characters are α 7→ eπikα , for integer
k. By Fourier inversion, it suffices to prove that Pp1 and Pp2 take the same value at every
such character. When an individual quotient in (3.5) is indeterminate, evaluate along
tu = exp((πik + ε)u) and let ε → 0.
Case 1: k = 2m is even. For a weight w, its individual factor has value
                                              (
                              tw − t             −1,                 mw ∈
                                                                        / Z,
                                       =                                                   (3.6)
                              1 − tw k           (1 − w)/w,          mw ∈ Z.

The second value follows by taking the ratio of the two first derivatives in ε. All these values
are nonzero, so common weights can be canceled.
    The first column of (3.4) has exact reduced denominator d, and the other three have
exact reduced denominator 3d, since 3 ∤ b. Within either denominator group, therefore, all
factors are exceptional in (3.6), or none are. The exceptional signed product for the first
group is b A2e
         Q      b
              b = 1. For the other group it is
                                                     2eb
                      Y     b 2d + b 2d − b                     Y
                                                             =       (Rb /Ab )2eb = 1.
                       b
                           3d − b d − b d + b                    b

The nonexceptional signs disappear because all signed counts are even. A square has
exceptional value 1 and nonexceptional value −1; its total contribution is 1, since there are
4E squares. This proves equality in Case 1, including k = 0.
Case 2: k is odd and 3 ∤ k. Each factor is

                                      tw − t
                                               = i cot(πkw/2).
                                      1 − tw k
All chain weights have a reduced denominator that is a nontrivial power of 3. None of their
cotangents has a zero or pole in this case: either would imply that this denominator divides
k. Squares also have finite nonzero factors. Hence common weights may again be canceled.


                                                    10
   Put C(u) = cot(πku/2). The exact signed identity we need is
                                               C(b/(3d))
                          C(b/d) =                                  .                          (3.7)
                                     C((d − b)/(3d))C((d + b)/(3d))
Indeed, with x = πkb/(6d) the usual triple-angle product gives
                      cot x cot(x + kπ/3) cot(x + 2kπ/3) = − cot(3x).
The shifts by kπ/3 give the same three factors modulo π as the shifts by π/3, because 3 ∤ k.
Since k is odd,
                                  1                                              1
        cot(x + kπ/3) =                     ,       cot(x + 2kπ/3) = −                     .
                            C((d − b)/(3d))                                C((d + b)/(3d))
Substitution proves (3.7). Its 2eb -th power is exactly the assertion that the signed cotangent
product in row b of (3.4) equals 1. Each square contributes C(1/2) = cot(πk/4) ∈ {1, −1},
whose 4E-th power is 1. Finally the powers of i are the same because the two complete
polynomials have the same number s0 of variables. This proves equality in Case 2.
Case 3: k is odd and 3 | k. A pure cube has spectrum t1/3 + t2/3 , whose value is −1 + 1 = 0.
Before the final common cubes were inserted, both sides were already isolated sums of chains
and squares, so their spectra were finite polynomials. Multiplication by a cube spectrum
therefore makes both character values zero. This argument uses those finite polynomials,
and does not cancel a zero against a pole of an individual weight quotient. It completes the
Fourier comparison.
    Weighted homogeneous monodromy has finite order and hence is semisimple. Theorem 2.4
now converts the equality of spectra modulo 2 in the common dimension into an isomorphism
of real Seifert forms. The same equality gives equal eigenvalue multiplicities. All summands
are chains, including the pure powers, so Theorem 2.5 gives an isomorphism of integral
monodromy modules. These are separate isomorphisms; no compatibility between them is
asserted here.
     Finally, every nonsquare weight has denominator dividing D. Each square has spectrum
t , so the 4E squares together contribute t2E . All spectral exponents of either seed therefore
 1/2

belong to D−1 Z. Their monodromy eigenvalues are D-th roots of unity. Semisimplicity then
gives MpDj = 1 for j = 1, 2, as claimed.

Corollary 3.4 (Removing eigenvalue one). In two new variables on each side, put
                       qj = pj + x5 + y 7 ,       j = 1, 2,      s = s0 + 2.                   (3.8)
These are real-coefficient isolated sums of chains in the same even number s of variables,
with orders 2 and 3. Their real Seifert forms are isomorphic, and their integral monodromy
modules are isomorphic. Both monodromies have odd order dividing
                                           m = 312 · 5 · 7,
and neither has eigenvalue 1.
Proof. The new terms preserve isolation and ordinary orders. Formula (3.5) multiplies
each seed spectrum by the same two pure-power spectra, preserving equality modulo 2.
Theorems 2.4 and 2.5 consequently apply again. Each new eigenvalue has the form
                     αβγ,        αD = 1,      β 5 = γ 7 = 1,   β ̸= 1,   γ ̸= 1.
Because D, 5, and 7 are pairwise coprime, its order divides 35D and is divisible by both 5 and
7. In particular it is not 1. Finite-order weighted homogeneous monodromy is semisimple, so
the same bound holds for the order of the operators themselves.

                                                  11
4     Local and rational isometries of tensor squares
Let q1 , q2 be the polynomials of Corollary 3.4, in the same even number s of variables. Write
Lj for their Milnor lattices and Sj for their integral Seifert forms. The two inputs from that
corollary are an isomorphism of the integral monodromy modules and an isomorphism of the
real Seifert forms. We now combine these inputs, first locally and then rationally.
    Choose an odd integer m divisible by the orders of both monodromies, and choose r ∈ Z
with 2r ≡ 1 (mod m). With s even and the monodromy convention in Equation (2.1), put

                                    Tj = Sj−1 Sjt ,        Bj = Sj Tjr .                   (4.1)

Throughout, an equivariant isometry between data (L, T, B) means an isometry of the forms
that intertwines the displayed operators. Tensor products carry both the tensor product form
and the tensor product operator.

Lemma 4.1 (Symmetrization). Each Bj is an integral unimodular symmetric form preserved
by Tj . The pair (Bj , Tj ) recovers Sj by Sj = Bj Tj−r . The real Seifert isometry is an
equivariant real isometry of the symmetric data. Symmetrization commutes with tensor
products of even-variable factors, up to the common signs in Theorem 2.2.

Proof. Suppress the subscript. The defining equality S t = ST implies

                      T t ST = S,        B t = (T r )t S t = ST 1−r = ST r = B.

It also gives T t BT = B. Integrality and unimodularity follow from those of S and T . An
isometry of S intertwines S −1 S t , and therefore preserves B as well. For tensor products, use
the same r modulo a common odd exponent and the identity

                            (S1 ⊗ S2 )(T1 ⊗ T2 )r = (S1 T1r ) ⊗ (S2 T2r ).

The overall Seifert signs supplied by the integral Thom–Sebastiani theorem depend only on
the factor dimensions [30]; they are thus the same on the two sides of every comparison
here.

    The local comparison will concern the first tensor squares

                                         Aj = (Lj , Tj , Bj )⊗2 .

Our goal is an equivariant isometry between A1 and A2 over every Zℓ , together with one
over Q. The integral operator-module isomorphism lets us compare the two forms on a
common lattice. At odd primes a tensor square makes these forms isometric; at 2 the prepared
operators already give uniqueness before tensoring. The real Seifert isometry then supplies
the archimedean input for rational descent.

4.1    Odd primes
We first give the elementary lifting fact needed for a simultaneous isometry of the form and
operator.

Lemma 4.2 (Lifting in a finite operator algebra). Let ℓ be an odd prime and let A be a
commutative Zℓ -algebra that is finite as a Zℓ -module. Write J for its Jacobson radical. Then
A/J is a product of finite fields, and A is complete for the J-adic topology. For a unit u ∈ A:
    1. if its image in every residue field is a square, then u is a square in A;


                                                      12
   2. u = a2 + b2 for some a, b ∈ A.

Proof. The algebra is complete for the ℓ-adic topology. For every c ∈ A, the geometric series
for (1 − ℓc)−1 converges, so ℓA ⊆ J. The finite algebra A/ℓA has nilpotent radical and
semisimple quotient a product of finite fields. Consequently J N ⊆ ℓA for some N , proving
that the two topologies agree and establishing the first assertions.
    For (1), choose a lift v of a square root in A/J. Both v and 2v are units. If e = v 2 −u ∈ J k ,
replace v by v − e/(2v). The new error is e2 /(4v 2 ) ∈ J 2k . Iteration converges to a square
root of u.
    In a finite field k of odd cardinality, the sets of squares and of ū minus the squares each
have (|k| + 1)/2 elements. They intersect, so ū = ā2 + b̄2 . For (2), make such a choice in each
residue field and lift it to a0 , b0 ∈ A. Then c = a20 + b20 is a unit and u/c ∈ 1 + J. By (1),
write u/c = v 2 . Taking a = va0 and b = vb0 proves the claim.

Proposition 4.3 (Odd-prime tensor squares). Let L be a finite free Zℓ -module, with ℓ odd,
and let T be an automorphism of L. If B1 , B2 are unimodular symmetric forms preserved by
T , then
                    (L ⊗ L, T ⊗ T, B1 ⊗ B1 ) ∼
                                             = (L ⊗ L, T ⊗ T, B2 ⊗ B2 )
by an equivariant integral isometry.

Proof. Set P = B1−1 B2 , so B2 (x, y) = B1 (x, P y). Unimodularity makes P an integral
automorphism. Symmetry of B2 makes it self-adjoint for B1 , and invariance of both forms
gives P T = T P .
     Write the characteristic polynomial of P modulo ℓ as i fiei , with distinct monic irreducible
                                                         Q

fi . Lift this coprime factorization to det(X − P ) = i Fi over Zℓ , where Fi mod ℓ = fiei . For
                                                     Q

completeness, the lift is obtained successively modulo ℓn . For two coprime monic residue
factors f, g of degrees a, b, the correction map

                        (u, v) 7−→ ug + f v,      deg u < a,     deg v < b,

is an isomorphism onto the polynomials of degree less than a + b: its kernel is zero by
coprimality and the dimensions agree. It therefore corrects the product by any prescribed
error at the next power of ℓ, without changing monicity. Completeness gives the lift, and
iteration handles any number of factors. The Chinese remainder idempotents for the Fi ,
evaluated at P , give
                               M
                          L=         Li ,   Fi (Pi ) = 0,      Pi = P |Li .
                                 i

These idempotents are polynomials in P . They are self-adjoint and commute with T , so the
sum is orthogonal for B1 and B2 and each Li is T -stable. Each restricted form is unimodular.
   On Li ⊗ Lj , let Aij be the algebra generated by Pi ⊗ 1 and 1 ⊗ Pj . Cayley–Hamilton
bounds the degrees in these two generators, so this is a finite commutative Zℓ -algebra of
endomorphisms. Every element is self-adjoint for the restricted form B1 ⊗ B1 and commutes
with T ⊗ T . The unit
                                      Uij = Pi ⊗ Pj
relates the two restricted tensor forms. Its inverse belongs to Aij , since the inverses of the
generators are polynomials in them with integral coefficients.
    If i = j, consider a residue field of Aii . The relations Fi (Pi ) = 0 imply that the two
generator images x, y are roots of fi . They are nonzero because the generators are units. In




                                                13
a finite field, two roots of the same irreducible polynomial over Fℓ are Frobenius conjugates.
                h
Hence y = xℓ for some h ≥ 0, and
                                           h
                                                     h
                                                              2
                                 xy = x1+ℓ = x(1+ℓ )/2             .

Lemma 4.2 supplies a ∈ Aii with a2 = Uii . Because a is self-adjoint,

                  (B1 ⊗ B1 )(ax, ay) = (B2 ⊗ B2 )(x, y)           (x, y ∈ Li ⊗ Li ).

   For i < j, pair Li ⊗ Lj with Lj ⊗ Li . The factor swap identifies their operators and both
their forms. On the resulting two equal blocks, use Lemma 4.2 to choose a, b ∈ Aij with
a2 + b2 = Uij and set                               !
                                              a b
                                     M=               .
                                             −b a
Writing ∗ for adjoint with respect to the first tensor form on the two blocks gives
                                                          !
                                       ∗       Uij    0
                                    M M=                 .
                                                0    Uij

This is invertible, and M commutes with the tensor operator. The diagonal-block maps and
these paired-block maps combine to an integral equivariant isometry from the second tensor
form to the first. Its inverse has the direction asserted in the proposition.

4.2   The prime two
Here the odd order and absence of eigenvalue 1 give a stronger result. The unramified
hermitian classification underlying this step belongs to the classical local theory developed by
Jacobowitz [11]. We give the needed argument directly, including residue characteristic two.

Proposition 4.4 (Dyadic uniqueness). Let L be a finite free Z2 -module, and let T satisfy
T m = 1 for an odd m. Suppose 1 is not an eigenvalue of T on L ⊗ Q2 . Any two T -invariant
unimodular symmetric forms on L are equivariantly isometric over Z2 .

Proof. The reduction of X m − 1 modulo 2 is separable, since its derivative is X m−1 there.
Lifting its distinct irreducible factors gives
                                                          Y
                               O = Z2 [X]/(X m − 1) =             Oi ,
                                                              i

where each Oi is the integer ring of an unramified extension of Q2 . The action X 7→ T
decomposes L = i Mi . Every Mi is free over Oi : it is finite and torsion-free over this
                   L

discrete valuation ring.
    Invariance of a form B says that the adjoint of X is X −1 . Let σ denote this involution
of O. If it exchanges the factors indexed by i and i′ , then Mi and Mi′ are isotropic and
pair perfectly with each other; they are orthogonal to all other factors. Such a pairing has a
unique equivariant isometry class for the prescribed modules. Indeed, it identifies Mi′ with
the Z2 -dual of Mi , with its Oi -action transported by σ. An isomorphism on Mi extends
uniquely by its inverse dual to an isometry of the pair.
    It remains to treat a nonzero Mi whose factor is preserved by σ. Write Oi = D and
D0 = Dσ . The involution on D is nontrivial. Otherwise the image ζ of X would satisfy
ζ = ζ −1 ; its odd order would force ζ = 1, contrary to the hypothesis. Thus D/D0 is an
unramified quadratic extension.


                                               14
   We record explicitly how B becomes an integral hermitian form. The trace pairing of D
over Z2 is perfect: modulo 2 it is the nondegenerate trace pairing of a finite separable field
extension, and its determinant is therefore a unit. Hence there is a unique D-valued form h
such that                                 
                         TrD/Z2 ah(x, y) = B(ax, y)       (a ∈ D).                       (4.2)
The adjoint relation and symmetry of B give

                      h(ax, by) = aσ(b)h(x, y),       h(y, x) = σ(h(x, y)).

Thus h is hermitian, with linear first variable. It is unimodular: after extending to fraction
fields, the B-dual of Mi equals its h-dual. Indeed, if B(x, Mi ) ⊆ Z2 , then for every a ∈ D
and y ∈ Mi ,
                               B(ax, y) = B(x, σ(a)y) ∈ Z2 .
Testing all a in (4.2) and using the perfect trace pairing gives h(x, Mi ) ⊆ D; the converse is
immediate. This argument takes no quotient by 2.
   Every unimodular hermitian form over D/D0 is determined by its rank. Here are the
details in residue characteristic two. Let k/k0 be the quadratic residue extension and let h̄
be the reduced hermitian form. There is a vector of nonzero length. If all lengths vanished,
then for all x, y and a ∈ k,
                                                                        
                         0 = h̄(x + ay, x + ay) = Trk/k0 σ(a)h̄(x, y) .

The finite-field trace pairing would force h̄ = 0, contradicting nonsingularity. A lift of a vector
of nonzero length has unit length u ∈ D0× . Its line splits off integrally, by the projection
x 7→ u−1 h(x, v)v. Its orthogonal complement is again unimodular. Induction diagonalizes h
with all diagonal entries in D0× .
     Every such unit is a norm from D× . The residue norm k × → k0× is surjective. After
lifting a residue preimage, improve a norm congruence modulo 2n to one modulo 2n+1 using

                ND/D0 (1 + 2n z) ≡ 1 + 2n TrD/D0 (z)     (mod 2n+1 ),       n ≥ 1.

The trace modulo 2 is surjective, so the needed z always exists. The corrections converge.
Rescaling each diagonal vector therefore makes every diagonal entry 1. The ranks of the Mi
depend only on the operator module, so this proves uniqueness on every fixed factor and
completes the proof.

4.3    Rational descent
Although neither Tj has eigenvalue 1, its tensor square can: an eigenvalue and its inverse
have product 1. The rational argument must therefore include an ordinary quadratic-form
component at eigenvalue 1, as well as the hermitian components for nonreal eigenvalues. The
odd order still excludes −1.
   We shall use Hasse–Minkowski in the form stated in Theorem 2.6. The passage from
quadratic forms to hermitian forms needed here has an elementary proof.

Lemma 4.5 (Hermitian forms from their lengths). Let E/F be a quadratic field extension
with char F ̸= 2, and let h1 , h2 be nonsingular hermitian forms. If the quadratic forms

                                        Qhj (x) = hj (x, x)

on the underlying F -spaces are isometric, then h1 , h2 are E-linearly isometric.


                                                15
Proof. The polar pairing of Qh is 12 TrE/F h(x, y). If it annihilates x, testing scalar multiples
of y and using the nondegenerate trace pairing shows h(x, y) = 0 for every y. Thus Qh is
nonsingular. In particular a nonzero hermitian space contains a vector of nonzero length,
and such a vector splits off an orthogonal hermitian line.
    The quadratic cancellation used below is the reflection argument underlying Witt cancel-
lation [38]; we include the needed form of it. For a quadratic form Q with polar form b and a
vector z of nonzero length, the reflection

                                                      2b(v, z)
                                       ρz (v) = v −            z
                                                       Q(z)

is an isometry, as direct expansion shows. If Q(x) = Q(e) = a ̸= 0, then Q(x − e) + Q(x + e) =
4a. If Q(x − e) ̸= 0, the reflection in x − e sends x to e. Otherwise reflection in x + e sends x
to −e, and reflection in e sends −e to e. It follows that an isometry ⟨a⟩ ⊥ V ∼   = ⟨a⟩ ⊥ W can
                                                                                           ∼
be adjusted to match the  √ two displayed vectors, and then restricts to an isometry V = W .
    Now write E = F ( d). Choose x of hermitian length a ̸= 0 for h1 , and let y be its
image under an isometry of the length quadratic forms. The lines Ex and Ey are hermitian
isometric, and their length quadratic forms are both

                                        aNE/F = ⟨a, −ad⟩.

Split these hermitian lines off. Cancel the two nonzero quadratic lines ⟨a⟩ and ⟨−ad⟩
successively by the preceding reflection argument. The complementary hermitian forms again
have isometric length forms. Induction on their E-dimension proves the lemma.

Lemma 4.6 (Equivariant rational local–global principle). Let (Vj , Uj , βj ) be rational vector
spaces with nonsingular symmetric forms preserved by operators of finite odd order. If they
are equivariantly isometric over R and over Qℓ for every prime ℓ, then they are equivariantly
isometric over Q.

Proof. Take a common odd exponent for the operators. The cyclotomic decomposition of
each Vj is orthogonal: its idempotents are unchanged under Uj 7→ Uj−1 , which is the adjoint
involution. Each equivariant local isometry respects these decompositions, and corresponding
component dimensions agree.
   The eigenvalue-1 component carries an ordinary rational symmetric form. Its local
isometries give a rational isometry by Theorem 2.6. Odd order excludes eigenvalue −1. For
any remaining cyclotomic component put

                         E = Q(ζd ),       F = Q(ζd + ζd−1 ),         d > 1.

The component is an E-vector space, with Uj acting by ζd . Complex conjugation σ is a
nontrivial involution of E. The same trace construction as (4.2), now over Q, gives a unique
nonsingular E/F -hermitian form hj satisfying
                                            
                          TrE/Q ahj (x, y) = βj (ax, y)            (a ∈ E).

     An equivariant isometry over a rational completion is linear over the corresponding
algebra E ⊗Q Qℓ , or over E ⊗Q R, and preserves the trace identity. Nondegeneracy of the
extended trace pairing therefore makes it an isometry of the extended hermitian forms.
Decomposing F ⊗Q Qℓ into its completion factors supplies an isometry at every place of
F above ℓ; decomposing F ⊗Q R supplies every archimedean place. This also covers finite
places where E/F splits, since the trace pairing of the resulting quadratic étale algebra is
still nondegenerate.

                                                16
   Consequently the nonsingular quadratic length forms Qh1 and Qh2 are isometric over
every completion of F . Hasse–Minkowski over F gives a global quadratic isometry [16,
Theorem 25.64(c)]. Lemma 4.5 upgrades its existence to an E-linear hermitian isometry.
Such an isometry preserves the rational symmetric form and intertwines Uj . Combining the
cyclotomic components proves the claim.

Proposition 4.7 (Local and rational square isometries). Set
                                     Aj = (Lj , Tj , Bj )⊗2 .
There are an equivariant rational isometry R : A1 ⊗ Q −→ A2 ⊗ Q and, for every prime ℓ, an
equivariant isometry Dℓ : A1 ⊗ Zℓ −→ A2 ⊗ Zℓ . These can be chosen so that Dℓ = R after
extension to Qℓ for all but finitely many primes.
Proof. Use the integral operator-module isomorphism of Corollary 3.4 to transport the two
forms to a common module with a common operator. Proposition 4.3 gives the required
square isometry at each odd prime. Proposition 4.4 applies at 2, because the prepared
operators have odd order and no eigenvalue 1; tensor its isometry with itself. Lemma 4.1
supplies the real isometry, which also tensors. Lemma 4.6 now gives R. Finally, the matrices
of R and R−1 in integral lattice bases have denominators supported at finitely many primes.
At every other prime R itself is an integral lattice isometry, so choose Dℓ = R there.


5     From local isometries to an integral isometry
We now turn the local and rational isometries of Proposition 4.7 into one integral isometry,
after two further operations. A second tensor square removes all eigenspace determinants from
the discrepancy between the local and rational maps. Two common polynomial summands
then put the relevant isometry groups within the scope of strong approximation.
    Write the tensor-square data as
                            Aj = (Mj , τj , bj ) = (L⊗2   ⊗2   ⊗2
                                                     j , Tj , Bj ).

Fix the equivariant rational isometry R : A1 −→ A2 and the equivariant local lattice isometries
Dℓ supplied by Proposition 4.7, with Dℓ = R for all but finitely many primes ℓ.

5.1   Cancelling the determinant on each eigenspace
The ratio R−1 Dℓ preserves b1 and commutes with τ1 over Qℓ , but need not have determinant
one on each eigenspace. To cancel these determinants by a second tensor square, we use
complex conjugation on the real-coefficient polynomials qj . Recall that their common ambient
dimension s is even and that Bj = Sj Tjr .
Lemma 5.1 (Integral reversers). There is an integral involution Cj of Lj such that
                            Cj−1 Tj Cj = Tj−1 ,        Cjt Bj Cj = Bj .
Proof. Complex conjugation preserves the argument-zero Milnor page and exchanges its
positive and negative normal directions; let Cj be its action on middle homology. We check
the sign directly in the linking definition of the Seifert form [17]. The ambient sphere has
dimension 2s − 1, and the cycles have dimension s − 1. Complex conjugation has degree
                                                                                 2
(−1)s = 1 on that sphere, and interchanging the two linking cycles has sign (−1)s = 1. If y +
and y − denote the two push-offs, then
                            Sj (Cj x, Cj y) = lk(x, y − ) = lk(y − , x)
                                           = lk(y, x+ ) = Sj (y, x).

                                                  17
The third equality moves both cycles along the page-normal flow. Thus Cjt Sj Cj = Sjt . Taking
the monodromy of this congruence gives Cj−1 Tj Cj = Tj−1 , and then

                             Cjt Bj Cj = Sjt Tj−r = Sj Tj1−r = Bj .

The map on oriented cycles already includes conjugation’s effect on page orientation; the
calculation uses the orientation of the ambient sphere for linking.
                                                    (2)
   Tensoring gives an integral isometry Cj                = Cj ⊗ Cj of bj that reverses τj . On the fourth
tensor powers of the original data define
                            (2)
                b = R ⊗ C R(C )−1 , (2)                                         (2)
                                                            b ℓ = Dℓ ⊗ C Dℓ (C )−1 .   (2)   
                R        2   1                              D           2     1                      (5.1)

Both second factors intertwine the operators: each conjugating map reverses its operator,
and R and Dℓ intertwine them. They also preserve the forms. Consequently R     b is a rational
equivariant isometry, and D
                          b ℓ is an equivariant isometry of the fourth-power lattices over Zℓ .

Lemma 5.2 (Eigenspace determinant cancellation). For every prime ℓ, the ratio R   b −1 D
                                                                                       b ℓ has
determinant 1 on every eigenspace of τ1 ⊗ τ1 over Qℓ . This remains true after tensoring both
maps with identity maps on any common finite-order operator data.
                                         (2)
Proof. Put a = R−1 Dℓ and C = C1 . Multiplying the two maps in (5.1) gives the exact
identity
                              Rb −1 D
                                    b ℓ = a ⊗ CaC −1 .                          (5.2)
In particular, no compatibility of R with the reversers is required.
    Let Wγ be the γ-eigenspace of τ1 over Qℓ , and set

                             mγ = dim Wγ ,                     tγ = det(a|Wγ ).

Invariance and nondegeneracy of b1 give a perfect pairing between Wγ and Wγ −1 . Since a is
an isometry,
                              mγ −1 = mγ ,      tγ −1 = t−1
                                                         γ .                          (5.3)
For γ = 1, this says t21 = 1; no choice of its sign is needed. The reverser carries Wη−1 onto
Wη , so the determinant of CaC −1 on Wη is tη−1 .
    For each λ, its entire eigenspace in the tensor square is
                                               M
                                                      Wγ ⊗ W η ,
                                               γη=λ

where the sum ranges over all ordered pairs of occurring eigenvalues. By the determinant
formula for a tensor product, the determinant of (5.2) on this space is
                                                               Y
                                                                   tm
                                                                    γ
                                                                      η

                                  Y             m           γη=λ
                                         tm η   γ
                                          γ tη −1 = Y                     = 1.
                                  γη=λ                             tm
                                                                    η
                                                                      γ

                                                            γη=λ

The last equality exchanges γ and η in the denominator. It includes diagonal pairs and all
coincidences among product eigenvalues. Finally, tensoring with an identity gives, on each
new eigenspace, a product of powers of the already unit determinants.




                                                          18
5.2   Two common summands
Use new disjoint variables to form

                            u = z13 + · · · + z63 ,      v = z711 + z813 .                (5.4)

Both have an even number of variables and odd-order monodromy. Denote their symmetric-
form and operator data by U and V, and put

                              Hj = (Λj , Θj , βj ) = A⊗2
                                                      j ⊗ U ⊗ V.                          (5.5)

Extend the maps in (5.1) by the identity on these two common factors, keeping the notation
Rb and Db ℓ.
    The six cubes will make each eigenspace form indefinite. The degrees 11 and 13 exclude
real eigenvalues from the final operator, even though the preceding tensor squares may have
acquired eigenvalue 1. These two primes also enter the later proof that the links are homotopy
spheres in Lemma 6.2.
Lemma 5.3 (Spectral properties of the added factors). Every eigenvalue of Θj has odd order
divisible by both 11 and 13. On every complex eigenspace, the hermitian form

                                        (x, y) 7−→ βj (x, y)

is nondegenerate and indefinite; the complex dimension of that eigenspace is at least 21.
Proof. Before adjoining V, the operator order divides 3a · 5 · 7 for some a. The eigenvalues of
v are
                             b c
                            ζ11 ζ13 ,  1 ≤ b ≤ 10, 1 ≤ c ≤ 12.
Their nontrivial 11- and 13-primary components cannot cancel against an eigenvalue of the
earlier tensor factors. Thus every final order contains both primes and remains odd. In
particular, neither 1 nor −1 is a final eigenvalue.
   We calculate the signatures supplied by u. Let
                                                         !
                                                   1 −1
                                         A=             .
                                                   0 1

In the convention of Theorem 2.2, a one-cube Seifert matrix is Sc = −A [30, Corollary 3]. Its
chosen monodromy is                                     !
                                        −1 t      0 −1
                                t = −A A =                .
                                                  1 −1
Here the minus sign is the one-variable convention. The form
                                                               !
                                               2         0 1
                                      J = At =
                                                        −1 0

is alternating and t-invariant. Iterating Theorem 2.2 gives Su = (−1)15 (−A)⊗6 = −A⊗6 . The
sixfold monodromy is t⊗6 , and 2 · 2 ≡ 1 (mod 3), so its symmetric form is

                                    Bu = Su (t⊗6 )2 = −J ⊗6 .

We compute the signatures of J ⊗6 below; passing to Bu reverses every sign.
    Set ω = e2πi/3 and e+ = (1, −ω), e− = (1, −ω 2 ). These are eigenvectors of t with
eigenvalues ω and ω 2 , respectively, and
                               √                        √
                J(e+ , e+ ) = i 3,      J(e− , e− ) = −i 3, J(e+ , e− ) = 0.

                                                   19
In the resulting orthogonal tensor basis, a vector with k copies of e+ has eigenvalue ω −k
and length 27(−1)k+1 ; there are k6 such vectors. We obtain the following signatures, up to
reversal of every sign:

                                eigenvalue    k    signature dimension
                                     1     0, 3, 6   (20, 2)    22
                                    ω       2, 5     (6, 15)    21
                                    ω2      1, 4     (6, 15)    21

Every eigenspace of this common factor is therefore indefinite.
    For any real nondegenerate symmetric form b invariant under a finite-order operator,
its complex bilinear extension pairs the γ-eigenspace perfectly with the γ −1 -eigenspace.
Consequently b(x, y) restricts to a nondegenerate hermitian form on each eigenspace. Distinct
eigenspaces are orthogonal for this hermitian form.
    Apply this observation to each of the three factors in (5.5). A final eigenspace is the
orthogonal direct sum of the tensor products of factor eigenspaces whose eigenvalues have
the prescribed product. Each nonzero summand contains one of the indefinite spaces in the
table. Diagonalizing the other two hermitian forms shows that its tensor form has both signs:
multiply any nonzero diagonal entry from the other factors by a positive and a negative entry
from the six-cube factor. Every summand is thus indefinite and has dimension at least 21.
The same conclusions hold for their orthogonal direct sum.

5.3    The special unitary group and strong approximation
Proposition 5.4 (Integral equivariant isometry). The triples H1 and H2 in (5.5) are
isometric over Z: there is a lattice isomorphism U : Λ1 −→ Λ2 satisfying

                                     U Θ1 = Θ2 U,         U t β2 U = β1 .

Proof. Put V = Λ1 ⊗ Q. Since Θ1 has finite order, its minimal polynomial is a product of
distinct cyclotomic polynomials. Decompose the rational operator space as

                                                    Fd = Q(ζd + ζd−1 ),
                   M
             V =         Vd ,      Ed = Q(ζd ),                             nd = dimEd Vd .
                   d∈D

The action of Θ1 gives Vd its Ed -vector space structure. Distinct Vd are orthogonal for β1 .
By Lemma 5.3, all d are odd and divisible by 11 · 13, so Ed /Fd is quadratic with nontrivial
conjugation. The adjoint of multiplication by a ∈ Ed is multiplication by a, because the
adjoint of Θ1 is Θ−1
                  1 .
   For completeness, the nondegenerate trace pairing of Ed /Q defines a unique Ed -valued
form hd by                                
                        TrEd /Q ahd (x, y) = β1 (ax, y) (a ∈ Ed ).
This form is linear in its first argument, conjugate-linear in its second, and satisfies hd (y, x) =
hd (x, y). These identities follow by testing against every a in the displayed trace equation.
The same equation proves its nondegeneracy. It also shows that an Ed -linear map preserves
β1 exactly when it preserves hd .
    Let G be the algebraic Q-group of equivariant self-isometries of (V, Θ1 , β1 ) with determi-
nant 1 on every eigenspace over an algebraic closure. These conditions are defined over Q.
The preceding description identifies this algebraic group as
                                            Y
                                       G=         ResFd /Q SU(hd ).                           (5.6)
                                            d∈D



                                                     20
Indeed, commuting with Θ1 is exactly Ed -linearity on each Vd . Each embedding of Ed into
an algebraic closure gives one Θ1 -eigenspace, and the determinant on it is the corresponding
image of the Ed -determinant. Requiring all these determinants to be 1 gives precisely SU(hd ).
In particular this requirement removes the unitary determinant tori, and the absence of
eigenvalues ±1 leaves no orthogonal factor.
    Every embedding Fd ,→ R extends to a conjugate pair of embeddings of Ed into C. At this
real place the trace identity writes the underlying real form as 2 Re hd . After complexification,
its pairing (x, y) 7→ β1 (x, y) on either corresponding operator eigenspace is the associated
complex hermitian form. Lemma 5.3 therefore makes it indefinite, and nd ≥ 21. The group
SU(hd ) is connected, simply connected, and absolutely almost simple over Fd , since over an
algebraic closure it becomes SLnd [16, Theorem 24.44, Remark 24.46, and Summary 24.66].
At each real place it is a noncompact group SU(p, q) with p, q > 0.
    Theorem 2.7, applied to SU(hd ) over Fd with all archimedean places omitted, now gives
density of SU(hd )(Fd ) in its finite adelic group [25, Theorem A], with [26]; see also [27,
Theorem 2.3]. Restriction of scalars and the finite product in (5.6) therefore give
                                            G(Q) = G(AQ,f ).                                (5.7)
Here finite adeles mean the restricted product over all finite places. No isotropy over the
number field itself is being assumed; the required noncompactness is supplied at the real
places just checked.
   We spell out how (5.7) gives an integral map. For each prime set
                                         b −1 D
                                    aℓ = R    b ℓ,        Λj,ℓ = Λj ⊗ Zℓ .
Lemma 5.2 gives aℓ ∈ G(Qℓ ), and aℓ = 1 for all but finitely many ℓ. Thus a = (aℓ ) is a finite
adelic point. Define
                                                                             Y
                       Kℓ = {g ∈ G(Qℓ ) : gΛ1,ℓ = Λ1,ℓ },             K=         Kℓ .
                                                                             ℓ

In a basis of the actual lattice Λ1 , the subgroup Kℓ is G(Qℓ )∩GLrank Λ1 (Zℓ ). It is compact and
open in G(Qℓ ). To identify their product with an adelic open subgroup, take the schematic
closure of G in GL(Λ1 ) over Z. After inverting finitely many primes this is an integral model
of the same affine group, and its Zℓ -points are exactly Kℓ . Thus the Kℓ agree with the
reference integral subgroups defining the restricted product at all but finitely many primes.
Their product K is consequently compact and open in G(AQ,f ). This definition uses the full
lattice and requires no integral splitting of its cyclotomic components.
    By (5.7), the nonempty open coset aK contains a point g ∈ G(Q). For every prime we
can write g = aℓ kℓ with kℓ ∈ Kℓ , and hence
                            (Rg)(Λ
                             b    1,ℓ ) = Raℓ (Λ1,ℓ ) = Dℓ (Λ1,ℓ ) = Λ2,ℓ .
                                          b             b

A full integral lattice satisfies
                        Λj = {x ∈ Λj ⊗ Q : x ∈ Λj,ℓ for every prime ℓ} :
in a lattice basis this is the elementary identity Q ∩ ℓ Zℓ = Z. Applying this characterization
                                                             T

to Rg
    b and its inverse shows that U = Rg    b carries Λ1 onto Λ2 . It is an equivariant isometry
because both factors are such isometries, which proves the proposition.

Remark 5.5. An equivariant isometry of the symmetric data recovers an isometry of the
original Seifert data. Choose one integer r satisfying 2r ≡ 1 modulo a common odd exponent
of the final operators. If Sj′ = βj Θ−r
                                     j , then the isomorphism in Proposition 5.4 satisfies

                               U t S2′ U = U t β2 U Θ−r      −r   ′
                                                     1 = β1 Θ1 = S1 .


                                                     21
The tensor-product convention can multiply both final forms by the same sign, which does
not alter this identity.


6     From the integral forms to the ambient germs
We now turn the integral isometry of Proposition 5.4 into an equivalence of hypersurface
germs. The two extra prime-power summands introduced there also ensure that the links are
homotopy spheres. This permits a direct application of the spherical knot classification in
Theorem 2.8.

6.1   The final polynomials and their Seifert forms
For j ∈ {1, 2}, put
                            [1]      [2]     [3]        [4]
                      fj = qj + qj + qj + qj + z13 + · · · + z63 + x11 + y 13 .               (6.1)

       [a]
Here qj denotes a copy of qj in its own set of variables; all the displayed summands use
disjoint variable sets. Since qj has s0 + 2 variables and s0 is even, the common number of
variables is
                       N = 4(s0 + 2) + 6 + 2 = 4s0 + 16 ≡ 0 (mod 8).                 (6.2)
In particular, N > 3. The weights of the summands, each normalized to weighted degree one,
give positive weights for fj .
    Write (Lfj , Tjf , Sjf ) for the Milnor lattice, chosen monodromy operator, and integral Seifert
form of fj , with Tjf = (Sjf )−1 (Sjf )t . All monodromy orders under consideration are odd.
Choose a common odd multiple mf of them and an integer r with 2r ≡ 1 (mod mf ). As N is
even, the symmetric form associated with Sjf is

                                  Bjf = Sjf (Tjf )r ,          Sjf = Bjf (Tjf )−r .

The integral Thom–Sebastiani formula identifies these operator–form data with the data Hj
of Proposition 5.4, up to the same overall sign on the two symmetric forms. Indeed, every
factor in (6.1), grouped as four copies of qj , the sum of six cubes, and the sum x11 + y 13 , has
even ambient complex dimension. Its symmetrization therefore commutes with taking the
indicated tensor products, and the Thom–Sebastiani signs depend only on these common
dimensions.
    Consequently Proposition 5.4 supplies an integral isomorphism Ψ : Lf1 −→ Lf2 with

                                    ΨT1f = T2f Ψ,              Ψt B2f Ψ = B1f .

It also preserves the Seifert forms, because

                            Ψt S2f Ψ = Ψt B2f (T2f )−r Ψ = B1f (T1f )−r = S1f .               (6.3)

This is a simultaneous integral isometry, which is precisely the information needed for the
topological step.

Lemma 6.1. The polynomials f1 , f2 have isolated critical points at the origin, are reduced
both as polynomials and as analytic germs, and satisfy {ord0 (f1 ), ord0 (f2 )} = {2, 3}.

Proof. The first nonzero-coordinate argument in Lemma 3.2 shows that each chain has no
critical point anywhere in its affine space except the origin. The gradient equations of a
sum in disjoint variables separate into the gradient equations of its summands. The pure

                                                          22
powers have the same global property. Consequently the only critical point of each qj , and
then of each fj , is the origin. The orders of q1 , q2 are two and three. Disjoint copies have no
monomials that could cancel one another, and all added terms have degree at least three.
The claimed orders follow. More precisely, the 4E balancing squares in each copy of p1 are
the only quadratic terms. Four copies give Hessian ranks 16E for f1 and 0 for f2 , so both
ranks are even.
    If an irreducible nonunit analytic germ a occurred with multiplicity at least two in fj ,
we could write fj = a2 b. Every first derivative of fj would then vanish on V (a). A nonunit
hypersurface germ in CN has dimension N − 1 > 0, contradicting the isolated critical point.
Thus fj is reduced as an analytic germ. The same argument for a repeated nonconstant
polynomial factor would force the gradient to vanish on its positive-dimensional affine zero
set. The global critical-locus statement just proved excludes this as well, so fj is reduced as
a polynomial.

6.2   Spherical links and their embedded equivalence
Let
                Kj = V (fj ) ∩ Sε2N −1 ,       Xj = Sε2N −1 \ Kj ,            n = N − 1,
where ε > 0 is sufficiently small for both polynomials. The binding Kj is a smooth closed
manifold of dimension 2n − 1. Let Fj be a compact Milnor page, so the fiber of Xj → S 1 is
int Fj . The inclusion of this interior into Fj is a homotopy equivalence, and both have the
homotopy type of a bouquet of n-spheres. Moreover Kj is (n − 2)-connected by Theorem 2.1
[17].
Lemma 6.2. Each Kj is a homotopy sphere, and each embedding Kj ⊂ Sε2n+1 is a simple
knot.
Proof. Every eigenvalue of Tjf has the form
                                a b
                              ξζ11 ζ13 ,    1 ≤ a ≤ 10,         1 ≤ b ≤ 12,

where the order of ξ divides 3A · 5 · 7 for some integer A ≥ 1. The factors of orders 11 and 13
cannot cancel against each other or against ξ. Thus every eigenvalue has order divisible by
both 11 and 13.
   Since Tjf is integral and has finite order, its characteristic polynomial is a product of
cyclotomic polynomials Φd , with every occurring index d divisible by 143. For d > 1, the
elementary identity
                              (
                                p, d is a power of the prime p,
                   Φd (1) =
                                1, d has at least two distinct prime factors
                                   Q
follows by induction from d = e|d, e>1 Φe (1): the prime-power divisors already contribute
the full prime factorization of d when d is not a prime power. Hence

                                           det(1 − Tjf ) = 1.                              (6.4)

In particular, 1 − Tjf is an automorphism of the integral middle homology of Fj .
   The geometric monodromy acts as (Tjf )−1 in our convention. The identity 1 − (Tjf )−1 =
−(Tjf )−1 (1 − Tjf ) shows that its difference from the identity is also invertible over Z. The
Wang exact sequence of the Milnor fibration now gives
                                                     (
                                                         Z,   i = 0, 1,
                                     Hi (Xj ; Z) =
                                                         0,   i ≥ 2.

                                                     23
Indeed, the only possible additional groups are, equivalently, the kernel and cokernel of 1 − Tjf
on Hn (Fj ; Z), and both vanish by (6.4). Alexander duality [9, Corollary 3.45] therefore makes
Kj an integral homology (2n − 1)-sphere. Its (n − 2)-connectivity makes it simply connected.
The Hurewicz and Whitehead Theorems [9, Theorem 4.32 and Corollary 4.33] show that it is
a homotopy sphere. Since 2n − 1 ≥ 5, the high-dimensional Poincaré theorem included in
Theorem 2.8 makes it homeomorphic to S 2n−1 .
   Finally, the homotopy exact sequence of int Fj → Xj → S 1 , together with the (n − 1)-
connectivity of int Fj , gives
                        π1 (Xj ) ∼
                                 = Z,         πi (Xj ) = 0   (2 ≤ i ≤ n − 1).
This is the simplicity condition for a (2n − 1)-knot.

   Orient the links and their Seifert surfaces by the Milnor fibration, using the same positive
push-off convention on both sides. By (6.3), their integral Seifert matrices are congruent.
Since n ≥ 3, Levine’s classification of simple spherical knots [15, Theorem 3], in the form of
Theorem 2.8, yields an isotopy of the embedded links. Smooth isotopy extension then gives
an orientation-preserving diffeomorphism of pairs
                              ϕ : (Sε2N −1 , K1 ) −→ (Sε2N −1 , K2 ).                      (6.5)
Levine’s definition allows smooth homotopy spheres that are not standard smooth spheres.
Thus no standard-smooth-sphere assertion is needed here. Nor is an extra framing hypothesis
needed: the classification is for these oriented embedded knots with their Seifert forms. The
same implication is part of the classification of high-dimensional simple fibered links [4, 29];
see also [19].

6.3   An explicit homeomorphism of ambient germs
We finish by spelling out the passage from the sphere to an ambient neighborhood of the
origin. For a positive weight vector w = (w1 , . . . , wN ), define
                          aw (t, x) = (tw1 x1 , . . . , twN xN ),     t > 0.
For each nonzero x, the function t 7→ ∥aw (t, x)∥2 = i t2wi |xi |2 is strictly increasing, with
                                                    P

limits zero and infinity at the two ends of (0, ∞). Each nonzero weighted orbit therefore
meets Sε2N −1 in exactly one point. Consequently
                                         2N
                Aw : C(Sε2N −1 ) −→ B ε ,            [x, t] 7−→ aw (t, x),   0 ≤ t ≤ 1,    (6.6)
is a continuous bijection, where all points (x, 0) are identified and their image is zero. The
uniform bound ∥aw (t, x)∥ ≤ εtmini wi proves continuity at the cone vertex. The domain is
compact and the target Hausdorff, so Aw is a homeomorphism.
    Let w(j) be the weight vector of fj . Weighted homogeneity gives
                                     fj (aw(j) (t, x)) = tfj (x).
                                                             2N
Thus Aw(j) identifies the cone on Kj with V (fj ) ∩ B ε . Extend the map in (6.5) by
                                                 
                  h(0) = 0,      h aw(1) (t, x) = aw(2) (t, ϕ(x))        (0 < t ≤ 1).      (6.7)
Equivalently, h = Aw(2) ◦ C(ϕ) ◦ A−1w(1)
                                         , so h is an ambient ball homeomorphism carrying
the first hypersurface to the second. It preserves the ball boundary; restricting to the ball
interiors gives the required homeomorphism germ of ambient pairs.
    Together with Lemma 6.1, this proves Theorem 1.1: the reduced hypersurface germs in
(6.1) are ambiently homeomorphic and have multiplicities two and three.

                                                     24
6.4    Consequences for function germs and initial forms
The same pair has unequal Hessian coranks, as the balancing squares already show. Its
real coefficients also allow us to strengthen the ambient equivalence to topological right
equivalence. We then use that stronger equivalence to compare initial forms after adding one
common square in a new variable.

Corollary 6.3 (Negative answer to Arnold’s corank problem). In the finite ambient dimension
N > 3 divisible by eight in (6.2), the polynomials f1 , f2 in (6.1) have different Hessian
coranks, although their reduced complex hypersurface germs are ambiently homeomorphic.
Both polynomials have real coefficients, are weighted homogeneous with positive rational
weights, and have isolated critical points at the origin.

Proof. Theorem 1.1 supplies the ambient homeomorphism and the stated analytic properties.
The calculation in the proof of Lemma 6.1 gives complex Hessian ranks 16E for f1 and 0 for
f2 . Since E > 0 by Lemma 3.1, their coranks satisfy

                           corank0 (f1 ) = N − 16E < N = corank0 (f2 ).



Corollary 6.4 (Right-topological multiplicity and parity counterexamples). For the same
polynomials f1 , f2 and the single finite ambient dimension N > 3 divisible by eight in
Theorem 1.1, there is a homeomorphism germ

                      φ : (CN , 0) −→ (CN , 0)         such that      f1 = f2 ◦ φ.

Nevertheless, their multiplicities are respectively 2 and 3. Thus neither multiplicity nor
multiplicity modulo two is invariant under topological right equivalence, even for reduced
real-coefficient weighted homogeneous holomorphic germs with positive rational weights and
isolated critical points at the origin.

Proof. For holomorphic germs f, g : (Cn , 0) → (C, 0) with n ≥ 2 and isolated critical points at
the origin, Saeki’s topological V -equivalence is precisely an ambient homeomorphism of their
zero-set germs [28, Definition 3]. Saeki’s Corollary 2 identifies this with topological right-left
equivalence [28]. King’s corollary [12], recalled in [28, Section 3, p. 28], then gives right
equivalence up to conjugation. In the precise source-homeomorphism formulation recorded by
Sampaio [31, proof of Proposition 2.4], there is a homeomorphism germ φ : (Cn , 0) → (Cn , 0)
such that
                             f = g ◦ φ or f = (c1 ◦ g ◦ cn ) ◦ φ,
where ck (z1 , . . . , zk ) = (z 1 , . . . , z k ). Theorem 1.1 supplies these hypotheses for f = f1 and
g = f2 . Writing f2 (z) = α aα z α with aα ∈ R, we have
                               P

                                                           X
                           (c1 ◦ f2 ◦ cN )(z) = f2 (z) =       aα z α = f2 (z).
                                                           α

Consequently both alternatives give f1 = f2 ◦φ. The multiplicities are 2 and 3 by Theorem 1.1,
and these integers are unequal both in Z and modulo two.

   The homeomorphism φ furnished by this argument need not coincide with the constructed
ambient homeomorphism h in (6.7). The parity conclusion concerns multiplicity; the unequal
Hessian coranks above have the same parity.
   We now pass to germs in N + 1 variables by adding the same square to each polynomial.
The product of φ with the identity preserves right equivalence. Both new germs have order

                                                  25
two, but their quadratic initial forms have different Milnor fibers. For a polynomial g vanishing
at the origin, write g∗ for its lowest nonzero homogeneous component for ordinary total degree,
not the weighted grading used above. We use the global unit fibre g∗−1 (1) as the initial-form
Milnor fibre: it has the homotopy type of the local Milnor fibre of g∗ [3, Proposition 1.6 in
arXiv v3]. This convention retains the full polynomial g∗ , not its square-free reduction.

Corollary 6.5 (Initial-form Milnor-fibre counterexamples). In the single ambient dimension
N + 1, put
                            fej (z, t) = fj (z) + t2 , j = 1, 2.
The germs fe1 , fe2 : (CN +1 , 0) → (C, 0) are topologically right equivalent and have isolated
critical points at the origin, but

                      H0 (fe1 )−1
                                       
                                         ∼                    H0 (fe2 )−1
                                                                               
                                                                                 ∼ 2
                               ∗ (1); Z = Z,                           ∗ (1); Z = Z .

Thus integral homology of the initial-form Milnor fibre is not invariant under topological
right equivalence, already in degree zero. In particular, the initial-form Milnor-fibre homotopy
conjecture of Budur, Fernández de Bobadilla, Lê, and Nguyen [3, Conjecture 1.7 in arXiv v3]
fails.

Proof. Apply the quadratic case of Sampaio’s stabilization [31, proof of Proposition 2.3]. For
the homeomorphism germ φ in Corollary 6.4, the product homeomorphism e      φ(z, t) = (φ(z), t)
satisfies
                                       fe1 = fe2 ◦ e
                                                   φ.
It also carries the corresponding zero-set germs to one another. Moreover, ∇fej (z, t) =
(∇fj (z), 2t), so the critical point remains isolated on each side.
    By the proof of Lemma 6.1, the quadratic part of f1 is
                                                         16E
                                                         X
                                                  Q=           u2α
                                                         α=1

in the independent balancing-square coordinates, with E > 0, whereas f2 has order three.
Hence
                             (fe1 )∗ = Q + t2 , (fe2 )∗ = t2 .
Their global unit fibres are respectively
                                       16E+1
                 (                                   )
                                                         × CN −16E ,
                                        X
                     v∈C   16E+1
                                   :           vα2 = 1                     CN × {−1, 1}.
                                       α=1

The quadric factor is connected. Indeed, writing v = x+iy, its equation becomes |x|2 −|y|2 = 1
and x · y = 0. The map (u, y) 7→ 1 + |y|2 u + iy, with u ∈ S 16E and y ⊥ u, identifies this
                                   p

quadric with the tangent bundle of the connected sphere S 16E . The first unit fibre is therefore
connected, whereas the second has exactly two components. This gives the displayed zeroth
homology groups and rules out homotopy equivalence.

    The isolatedness in Corollary 6.5 concerns the stabilized germs, not their initial forms.
In particular, the nonreduced initial form t2 is retained: replacing it by t would change its
unit fibre. No reducedness or isolatedness hypothesis on the initial forms is part of the cited
homotopy conjecture.




                                                         26
A     The finite arithmetic certificate
The following complete Python program verifies the finite calculation in Lemma 3.1. It uses
only integer arithmetic and the Python standard library. In the dictionaries representing
valuation columns, (r, p) denotes the valuation at the prime p of ratio number r. The
key (−1, 0) represents the appended row of ones. The rank routine performs Gaussian
elimination over F1009 , storing one normalized pivot for each leading row. Thus its return
value is exactly the rank of the augmented matrix. Separately, 1009 is prime: none of
2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31 divides it, and 322 > 1009.
    The sieve stores a prime divisor of every integer greater than one. Repeated division
therefore computes its prime valuations exactly. The preliminary cutoff and deletion of singly
supported columns give the matrix used in the proof; every deleted column receives coefficient
zero in the eventual relation. The final assertion is the sole finite calculation needed for
existence of the two product identities.




                                             27
 1   def matrix(N,K):
 2       fac=list(range(3*N+1))
 3       for p in range(2,3*N+1):
 4           if fac[p]==p:
 5                for x in range(p*p,3*N+1,p):
 6                    fac[x]=p
 7       # fac[x] for x>1 is a prime divisor
 8       table=[]
 9       def column(b):
10           col={}
11           for r,ns in enumerate(((N-b,-b),(2*N+b,2*N-b,b-3*N,-b-N))):
12               for x in ns:
13                    s=1 if x>0 else -1
14                    x=abs(x)
15                    while x>1:
16                        p=fac[x]
17                        if p>K:
18                             return None
19                        col[r,p]=col.get((r,p),0)+s
20                        x//=p
21           return col
22       for b in range(1,(N+1)//2):
23           if b%3:
24               col=column(b)
25               if col is not None:
26                    table.append({i:k for i,k in col.items() if k})
27       def counts():
28           cnt={}
29           for col in table:
30               for i in col:
31                    cnt[i]=cnt.get(i,0)+1
32           return cnt
33       cnt=counts()
34       assert (len(table),len(cnt))==(1118,1100)
35       while 1 in cnt.values():
36           table=[col for col in table if all(cnt[i]>1 for i in col)]
37           cnt=counts()
38       return table,len(cnt)
39
40   def rank(table,prime):
41       piv={}
42       for col0 in table:
43           col={i:v%prime for i,v in col0.items() if v%prime}
44           col[-1,0]=1
45           while col:
46               j=max(col)
47               if j not in piv:
48                   a=pow(col[j],prime-2,prime)
49                   piv[j]={i:k*a%prime for i,k in col.items()}
50                   break
51               a=col[j]
52               for i,k in piv[j].items():
53                   val=(col.get(i,0)-a*k)%prime
54                   if val:
55                        col[i]=val
56                   else:
57                        col.pop(i,None)
58       return len(piv)
59
60   M,r=matrix(3**11,4450)
61   assert (len(M),r,rank(M,1009))==(896,867,868)



                                               28
An explicit alternative relation is supplied in verification/support/explicit-relation.
json. It has 849 nonzero integer coefficients, each with at most 140 decimal digits, and posi-
tive coefficient sum. The standard-library program verification/validation/explicit_
relation.py verifies both product identities by trial division of all six integers in every row,
without using the matrix or its rank. It also checks every decreasing-remainder chain and the
variable counts in the polynomial construction. This independent witness is supplementary:
the rank computation above and the adjugate argument already prove Lemma 3.1.


References
 [1] Norbert A’Campo. Le nombre de Lefschetz d’une monodromie. Indagationes Mathemat-
     icae (Proceedings), 76(2):113–118, 1973. doi: 10.1016/1385-7258(73)90044-9.
 [2] Sven Balnojan and Claus Hertling. Real Seifert forms and polarizing forms of Steenbrink
     mixed Hodge structures. Bulletin of the Brazilian Mathematical Society, New Series,
     50(1):233–274, 2019. doi: 10.1007/s00574-018-0107-7. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
     1712.00383.
 [3] Nero Budur, Javier Fernández de Bobadilla, Quy Thuong Lê, and Hong Duc Nguyen.
     Cohomology of contact loci. Journal of Differential Geometry, 120(3):389–409, 2022.
     doi: 10.4310/jdg/1649953456. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.08213v3. Author
     version: arXiv:1911.08213v3.
 [4] Alan H. Durfee. Fibered knots and algebraic singularities. Topology, 13(1):47–59, 1974.
     doi: 10.1016/0040-9383(74)90037-8.
 [5] Christophe Eyral. Zariski’s multiplicity question—a survey. New Zealand Journal of
     Mathematics, 36:253–276, 2007. URL https://webdoc.sub.gwdg.de/ebook/serien/
     e/mpi_mathematik/2005/81.pdf.
 [6] Alexandre Fernandes, Zbigniew Jelonek, and José Edson Sampaio. Proof of the met-
     ric Arnold’s corank problem, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.03447v2.
     arXiv:2509.03447v2.
 [7] Javier Fernández de Bobadilla and Tomasz Pełka. Symplectic monodromy at radius
     zero and equimultiplicity of µ-constant families. Annals of Mathematics, 200(1):153–299,
     2024. doi: 10.4007/annals.2024.200.1.4. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.07007v5.
     Author version: arXiv:2204.07007v5.
 [8] Gert-Martin Greuel. Constant Milnor number implies constant multiplicity for quasi-
     homogeneous singularities. Manuscripta Mathematica, 56(2):159–166, 1986. doi:
     10.1007/BF01172153.
 [9] Allen Hatcher. Algebraic Topology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002. URL
     https://pi.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/AT/AT.pdf.
[10] Claus Hertling and Makiko Mase. The integral monodromy of isolated quasihomogeneous
     singularities. Algebra & Number Theory, 16:955–1024, 2022. doi: 10.2140/ant.2022.16.955.
     URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.08053.
[11] Ronald Jacobowitz. Hermitian forms over local fields. American Journal of Mathematics,
     84(3):441–465, 1962. doi: 10.2307/2372982.
[12] H. C. King. Topological type of isolated critical points. Annals of Mathematics, 107(3):
     385–397, 1978. URL https://annals.math.princeton.edu/1978/107-3/p02.



                                              29
[13] Lê Dũng Tráng. Calcul du nombre de cycles évanouissants d’une hypersurface complexe.
     Annales de l’Institut Fourier, 23(4):261–270, 1973. doi: 10.5802/aif.491.
[14] Lê Dũng Tráng and C. P. Ramanujam. The invariance of Milnor’s number implies the
     invariance of the topological type. American Journal of Mathematics, 98(1):67–78, 1976.
     doi: 10.2307/2373614.
[15] J. Levine. An algebraic classification of some knots of codimension two. Commentarii
     Mathematici Helvetici, 45:185–198, 1970. doi: 10.1007/BF02567325.
[16] J. S. Milne. Algebraic Groups: The Theory of Group Schemes of Finite Type over a
     Field, volume 170 of Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Cambridge University
     Press, Cambridge, 2022. URL https://www.jmilne.org/math/Books/iAG2022.pdf.
     Corrected reprint of the 2017 edition.
[17] John Milnor. Singular Points of Complex Hypersurfaces, volume 61 of Annals of
     Mathematics Studies. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1968.
[18] András Némethi. The real Seifert form and the spectral pairs of isolated hypersurface
     singularities. Compositio Mathematica, 98(1):23–41, 1995. URL https://www.numdam.
     org/item/CM_1995__98_1_23_0/.
[19] Walter D. Neumann. Topology of hypersurface singularities. In Rolf Berndt and Oswald
     Riemenschneider, editors, Erich Kähler: Mathematische Werke/Mathematical Works,
     pages 727–736. Walter de Gruyter, 2003. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.04386.
     Reposted as arXiv:1706.04386 in 2017.
[20] O. T. O’Meara. Introduction to Quadratic Forms, volume 117 of Grundlehren der
     mathematischen Wissenschaften. Springer-Verlag, Berlin–Göttingen–Heidelberg, 1963.
[21] OpenAI. Topological triviality of µ-constant families of surface singularities. OpenAI
     Math Release preprint OAI:Topological-triviality-of-mu-constant-families-of-surface-
     singularities-September-24-2026, 2026.
[22] Peter Orlik. On the homology of weighted homogeneous manifolds. In Proceedings of the
     Second Conference on Compact Transformation Groups, Part I, volume 298 of Lecture
     Notes in Mathematics, pages 260–269. Springer, Berlin, 1972. doi: 10.1007/BFb0070047.
[23] Peter Orlik and Richard C. Randell. The monodromy of weighted homogeneous singu-
     larities. Inventiones Mathematicae, 39:199–211, 1977. doi: 10.1007/BF01402973.
[24] Donal B. O’Shea. Topologically trivial deformations of isolated quasihomogeneous
     hypersurface singularities are equimultiple. Proceedings of the American Mathematical
     Society, 101(2):260–262, 1987. doi: 10.1090/S0002-9939-1987-0902538-0.
[25] V. P. Platonov. The problem of strong approximation and the Kneser–Tits conjecture
     for algebraic groups. Mathematics of the USSR-Izvestiya, 3(6):1139–1147, 1969. doi:
     10.1070/IM1969v003n06ABEH000838. URL https://www.mathnet.ru/eng/im2220.
[26] V. P. Platonov. Addendum to the paper “the problem of strong approximation and the
     Kneser–Tits conjecture for algebraic groups”. Mathematics of the USSR-Izvestiya, 4(4):
     784–786, 1970. doi: 10.1070/IM1970v004n04ABEH000932. URL https://www.mathnet.
     ru/eng/im2446.
[27] Andrei S. Rapinchuk. Strong approximation for algebraic groups. In Emmanuel Breuillard
     and Hee Oh, editors, Thin Groups and Superstrong Approximation, volume 61 of Mathe-
     matical Sciences Research Institute Publications, pages 269–298. Cambridge University
     Press, 2014. URL https://library.slmath.org/books/Book61/files/70rapi.pdf.


                                            30
[28] Osamu Saeki. Topological types of complex isolated hypersurface singularities. Ko-
     dai Mathematical Journal, 12(1):23–29, 1989. URL https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/
     article/kodaimath1978/12/1/12_1_23/_pdf/-char/ja.
[29] Osamu Saeki. Theory of fibered 3-knots in S 5 and its applications. Journal of
     Mathematical Sciences, the University of Tokyo, 6(4):691–756, 1999. URL https:
     //www.ms.u-tokyo.ac.jp/journal/pdf/jms060404.pdf.
[30] Koichi Sakamoto. The Seifert matrices of Milnor fiberings defined by holomorphic
     functions. Journal of the Mathematical Society of Japan, 26(4):714–721, 1974. doi:
     10.2969/jmsj/02640714.
[31] José Edson Sampaio. On the Milnor fibres of initial forms of topologically equiv-
     alent holomorphic functions, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.17127v1.
     arXiv:2503.17127v1.
[32] José Edson Sampaio. On the Arnold corank, the Zariski multiplicity, and the tangent
     Milnor fiber problems, 2026. URL https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
     413623762. Preprint, August 28, 2026.
[33] Marcos Sebastiani and René Thom. Un résultat sur la monodromie. Inventiones
     Mathematicae, 13:90–96, 1971. doi: 10.1007/BF01390095.
[34] Stephen Smale. Generalized Poincaré’s conjecture in dimensions greater than four.
     Annals of Mathematics, 74(2):391–406, 1961. doi: 10.2307/1970239.
[35] J. H. M. Steenbrink. Intersection form for quasi-homogeneous singularities. Compositio
     Mathematica, 34(2):211–223, 1977. URL https://www.numdam.org/item/CM_1977_
     _34_2_211_0/.
[36] J. H. M. Steenbrink. The spectrum of hypersurface singularities. Astérisque, 179–180:
     163–184, 1989. URL https://www.numdam.org/item/AST_1989__179-180__163_0/.
[37] The Stacks Project Authors. The Stacks project, 2026. URL https://stacks.math.
     columbia.edu. Tags 00ND and 02JN, accessed September 24, 2026.
[38] Ernst Witt. Theorie der quadratischen Formen in beliebigen Körpern. Journal für die
     reine und angewandte Mathematik, 176:31–44, 1937. doi: 10.1515/crll.1937.176.31.
[39] Stephen S.-T. Yau. Topological types and multiplicities of isolated quasi-homogeneous
     surface singularities. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society (N.S.), 19(2):
     447–454, 1988. doi: 10.1090/S0273-0979-1988-15695-9.
[40] Oscar Zariski. On the topology of algebroid singularities. American Journal of Mathe-
     matics, 54(3):453–465, 1932. doi: 10.2307/2370887.
[41] Oscar Zariski. Some open questions in the theory of singularities. Bulletin of the American
     Mathematical Society, 77(4):481–491, 1971. doi: 10.1090/S0002-9904-1971-12729-5.




                                              31
