                                     Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



                                           Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                        Advances in Mathematics
                                                  www.elsevier.com/locate/aim




On Herman’s positive entropy conjecture
Pierre Berger a,∗ , Dmitry Turaev b
a
    CNRS-Université Paris 13, France
b
    Imperial College London, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland



a r t i c l e            i n f o                       a b s t r a c t

Article history:                                       We show that any area-preserving C r -diﬀeomorphism of a
Received 24 January 2019                               two-dimensional surface displaying an elliptic ﬁxed point can
Accepted 6 February 2019                               be C r -perturbed to one exhibiting a chaotic island whose
Available online 3 May 2019
                                                       metric entropy is positive, for every 1 ≤ r ≤ ∞. This
Communicated by C. Feﬀerman
                                                       proves a conjecture of Herman stating that the identity
Keywords:                                              map of the disk can be C ∞ -perturbed to a conservative
Metric entropy                                         diﬀeomorphism with positive metric entropy. This implies
Symplectic dynamics                                    also that the Chirikov standard map for large and small
Lyapunov exponents                                     parameter values can be C ∞ -approximated by a conservative
Homoclinic biﬀurcation                                 diﬀeomorphisms displaying a positive metric entropy (a weak
Universal map                                          version of Sinai’s positive metric entropy conjecture). Finally,
                                                       this sheds light onto a Herman’s question on the density of
                                                       C r -conservative diﬀeomorphisms displaying a positive metric
                                                       entropy: we show the existence of a dense set formed by
                                                       conservative diﬀeomorphisms which either are weakly stable
                                                       (so, conjecturally, uniformly hyperbolic) or display a chaotic
                                                       island of positive metric entropy.
                                                              Crown Copyright © 2019 Published by Elsevier Inc. All
                                                                                                       rights reserved.




Contents

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1235
  1. Selected results and conjectures around the positive metric entropy conjecture . . . . . . . .                                1238



    * Corresponding author.
      E-mail address: berger@math.univ-paris13.fr (P. Berger).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aim.2019.04.002
0001-8708/Crown Copyright © 2019 Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
                    P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288                                            1235



 2. Proof of the main theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              1244
 3. Stochastic island . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          1247
 4. Geometric model for a suitable stochastic island . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                     1254
 5. Restoration of broken heteroclinic links . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 1260
 6. Rescaling Lemma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            1275
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1286




Introduction

   Consider a diﬀeomorphism f of a two-dimensional surface M. The maximal Lyapunov
exponent of x ∈ M is

                                                                    1
                                           λ(x) = lim sup             log Df n (x) .                                             (1)
                                                         n→∞        n

It quantiﬁes the sensitivity to the initial conditions: if λ(x) is positive, then the forward
orbits of most of the points from a neighborhood of x will diverge exponentially fast
from the orbit of x.
   Let f preserve a smooth area form ω on M. The metric entropy 1 of f is the integral
                                                                
                                                  hω (f ) :=         λ(x) ω(dx).                                                   (2)
                                                                M

Whenever the metric entropy of a dynamical system is positive, points in M display a
positive Lyapunov exponent with non-zero probability.
  One of the most fundamental questions in conservative dynamics is

Question 0.1. How typical are conservative dynamical systems with positive metric en-
tropy?

   Note that a diﬀerent notion of topological entropy is one of the basic tools in describ-
ing chaotic dynamics: positive topological entropy indicates the presence of uncountably
many orbits with a positive maximal Lyapunov exponent [36]. However, the positivity
of the metric entropy is a much stronger property, as it ensures positive maximal Lya-
punov exponent for a non-negligible set of initial conditions. While numerical evidence
for a large set of initial conditions corresponding to seemingly chaotic behavior in area-
preserving maps is abundant, a rigorous proof for the positivity of metric entropy is
available only for a small set of specially prepared examples (see Section 1). Currently
no mathematical technique exists for answering Question 0.1 in full generality.
   Several prominent conjectures are related to this question. In order to formulate them,
let us recall the topologies involved. For 1 ≤ r ≤ ∞, let Diﬀ rω (M) be the space of

 1
     We employ here Pesin formula for the Kolmogorov-Sinai entropy [52].
1236         P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



diﬀeomorphisms which keep the area form ω invariant. When r < ∞, the space Diﬀ rω (M)
is endowed with the uniform C r -topology. The space Diﬀ ∞    ω (M) is endowed with the
projective limit topology whose base is formed by all C r -open subsets for all ﬁnite r. Let
us ﬁx a metric dr compatible with the C r -topology (the space Diﬀ rω (M) with the metric
dr is complete). The C ∞ -topology in Diﬀ ∞ω (M) is deﬁned by the following metric:

                                          ∞
                                           1
                            d∞ (f, g) =              min(1, dr (f, g))
                                          r=0
                                                r!

(note that Diﬀ ∞
               ω (M) with the metric d∞ is complete).
   Consider the two-dimensional disc D := {(x, y) ∈ R2 : x2 + y 2 ≤ 1}. Let id be the
identity map of D. One of the favorite conjectures of Herman can be formulated as
follows.

Conjecture 0.2 (Herman [33]). For every ε > 0 there exists f ∈ Diﬀ ∞ ω (D) such that
d∞ (f, id) < ε and the metric entropy of f is positive: hω (f ) > 0.

  It is linked to his question:

Question 0.3 (Herman [33]). Is the set of diﬀeomorphisms f with positive metric entropy
hω (f ) dense in Diﬀ ∞
                     ω (D)?


   In this work we prove Herman’s Conjecture 0.2. This also could be a step towards a
positive answer to Question 0.3. Recall that a periodic point P of f is hyperbolic if the
eigenvalues of Df p (P ) (where p is the period of P ) are not equal to 1 in the absolute
value. The main result of this work is the following

Theorem A. For any surface (M, ω), if a diﬀeomorphism f ∈ Diﬀ ∞       ω (M) has a periodic
                                                ∞
point which is not hyperbolic, then there is a C -small (as small as we want) perturbation
of f such that the perturbed map fˆ ∈ Diﬀ ∞                                         ˆ
                                             ω (M) has positive metric entropy: hω (f ) > 0.


  If f = id, then every point in M is a non-hyperbolic ﬁxed point of f , so Theorem A
implies Herman’s conjecture immediately. Another immediate consequence employs the
notion of the weak stability [41]. The map f ∈ Diﬀ rω (M) is Cωr -weakly stable if all the
periodic points of any C r -close to f map fˆ ∈ Diﬀ rω (M) are hyperbolic.

Corollary B. A diﬀeomorphism f ∈ Diﬀ ∞                 ∞                     ∞
                                      ω (M) is either Cω -weakly stable or C -ap-
proximated by a diﬀeomorphism from Diﬀ ∞
                                       ω (M) which has positive metric entropy.


   This statement suggests that the answer to Question 0.3 has to be positive. The reason
is that the common belief among dynamicists is that any C ∞ -weakly stable map of a
closed manifold is uniformly hyperbolic (see Section 1.7). If this conjecture is true, then
             P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288        1237



every Cω∞ -weakly stable diﬀeomorphism has positive metric entropy (and, moreover, no
Cω∞ -weakly stable diﬀeomorphisms exist when M = D).
   Another metric entropy conjecture regards the very popular Chirikov standard map
family. This is a one-parameter family of area-preserving diﬀeomorphisms of T 2 deﬁned
for a ∈ R by

                            Ta (x, y) = (2x − y + a sin 2πx, x).                        (3)

For a ∈ (0, π2 ) this map has an elliptic ﬁxed point at (x = 1/2, y = 1/2) (a period-p
point P of an area-preserving map f is called elliptic if the eigenvalues of Df p (P ) are
equal to e±iα where α ∈ (0, π), i.e. they are complex and lie on the unit circle). When a
increases, the elliptic ﬁxed point loses stability and, at a large enough, the numerically
obtained phase portraits display a large set where the dynamics is apparently chaotic
(the so-called “chaotic sea” [18]). A conjecture due to Sinai can be formulated as follows
(cf. [56] P.144):

Conjecture 0.4. There exists a set Λ ⊂ R of positive Lebesgue measure such that, for
a ∈ Λ, the metric entropy of Ta is positive.

    This conjecture is still completely open despite intense eﬀorts, see e.g. [28]. However,
it is shown by Duarte [20] that the map Ta has elliptic periodic points for an open and
dense set of suﬃciently large values of parameter a. Hence, our main theorem implies
the following “approximative version” of Sinai’s Conjecture 0.4:

Corollary C. For every suﬃciently large or suﬃciently small a ∈ R, there exists a
C ∞ -small perturbation T̂ ∈ Diﬀ ∞
                                 ω of the map Ta such that T̂ has positive metric en-
tropy.

   We note that a large set (of almost full Lebesgue measure) in a neighborhood of
a generic elliptic point of an area-preserving C r -diﬀeomorphism with r ≥ 4 consists
of points with zero Lyapunov exponent (the points on KAM-curves [37]). Our result,
nevertheless, shows that the Lebesgue measure of the points with positive maximal
Lyapunov exponent in a neighborhood of any elliptic point can be positive too.
   The proof of Theorem A occupies Sections 2-6 of this paper. In Section 1 we remind
certain background information pertinent to this work.
   This work was partially ﬁnanced by the project BRNUH of USPC university, the
Steklov institute, the Royal Society, the ERC project of S. Van Strien, and the EPSRC
project by D.Turaev. The second author was supported by the grant 14-41-00044 of
the RSF. The ﬁrst author thanks M.-C. Arnaud for informing him about the Herman’s
conjecture. The second author is grateful to L. M. Lerman who attracted his attention
to Przytycki example. We are also grateful to M. Chaperon, S. Crovisier, B. Fayad, F.
Przytycki, and E. Pujals for important comments.
1238         P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



1. Selected results and conjectures around the positive metric entropy conjecture


   The study of the instability and chaos in conservative dynamics enjoys a long tradition
since the seminal work by Poincaré [53] on the tree-body problem.


1.1. Uniformly hyperbolic maps


  An invariant compact set K of the diﬀeomorphism f of a manifold M is uniformly
hyperbolic if the restriction T M|K of the tangent bundle of M to K splits into two
Df -invariant continuous sub-bundles E s and E u such that E s is uniformly contracted
and E u is uniformly expanded:


         T M|K = E s ⊕ E u ,     ∃N ≥ 1,    Df N |E s  < 1 ,   Df −N |E u  < 1 .

Whenever K = M, the diﬀeomorphism f is called uniformly hyperbolic or Anosov. Note
that the maximal Lyapunov exponent of a uniformly hyperbolic dynamical system is pos-
itive at every point. Hence, whenever the dynamics is conservative (i.e. f keeps invariant
a volume form ω), the metric entropy is positive.
    Such dynamics are very well understood. However, the existence of the splitting of T M
into two non-trivial continuous sub-bundles imposes strong restrictions on the topology
of M. For instance, there exists no uniformly hyperbolic diﬀeomorphism of a closed
two-dimensional surface diﬀerent from the torus T 2 .


1.2. Stochastic island


   The ﬁrst example of a non-uniformly hyperbolic area-preserving map of the disk was
given by Katok [35]. His construction started with an Anosov diﬀeomorphism of T 2 with
4 ﬁxed points and a certain symmetry. Then the diﬀeomorphism is modiﬁed so that the
ﬁxed points become non-hyperbolic and suﬃciently ﬂat (while the hyperbolicity is pre-
served outside of the ﬁxed points). After that, the torus is projected to a two-dimensional
disc. The singularities of this projection correspond to the ﬁxed points, and their ﬂatness
allows for making the resulting map of the disc a diﬀeomorphism. The positivity of the
metric entropy is inherited from the original Anosov map.
   This example has been pushed forward by Przytycki [54], where instead of making the
ﬁxed points non-hyperbolic he made a surgery to replace each of these ﬁxed points by
an elliptic island (in this case - a neighborhood of an elliptic ﬁxed point ﬁlled by closed
invariant curves) bounded by a heteroclinic link (as deﬁned below). Przytycki’s example
was put in a more general context by Liverani [39].
   Recall that given a hyperbolic periodic point P of a diﬀeomorphism f , the following
sets are immersed smooth submanifolds: the stable and, respectively, unstable manifolds
              P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288          1239


                   W s (P ; f ) := {x ∈ M : d(f n (x), P )    →     0}    and
                                                             n→+∞
                   W (P ; f ) := {x ∈ M : d(f (x), P )
                      u                          n
                                                              →     0}.
                                                             n→−∞



We will call a C 0 -embedded circle L a heteroclinic N -link if there exists N hyperbolic
periodic points P1 , . . . , PN ∈ L satisfying L ⊂ ∪i=1,...,N W s (Pi ) ∪ W u (Pi ). Note that a
heteroclinic N -link is a piecewise C ∞ -curve with possible break points at the periodic
points Pi .
   Przytycki construction gives an example of the stochastic island in the followings
sense.


Deﬁnition 1.1. A stochastic island is a two-dimensional domain I bounded by ﬁnitely
many heteroclinic links such that every point in I has positive maximal Lyapunov ex-
ponent.


   In this paper (see Section 3) we build one more example of a map f ∈ Diﬀ ∞
                                                                            ω (D) with a
stochastic island (where ω is the standard area form dx ∧ dy in the unit two-dimensional
disc D). To this aim, we adapt to the conservative setting the Aubin-Pujals blow-up
construction [5].
   One of the main diﬃculties in the Herman’s entropy conjecture is that no other exam-
ples of conservative maps of a disc with positive metric entropy are known. All of these
constructions are very fragile (sensitive to perturbations): for example, no C r -generic
ﬁnite-parameter family of area-preserving diﬀeomorphisms can have a parameter value
for which a heteroclinic or homoclinic link exists; no entire diﬀeomorphism (including
e.g. the standard map and any polynomial diﬀeomorphism) can have a heteroclinic or
homoclinic link [60]. Still, we prove our main theorem by showing that stochastic islands
appear near any elliptic point of an area-preserving diﬀeomorphism after a C ∞ -small
perturbation.


1.3. Strong regularity


   With the aim to extend the available examples of the non-uniformly hyperbolic be-
havior, Yoccoz launched a program called Strong Regularity in his ﬁrst lecture at Collège
de France [12]. The objective was to give a geometric-combinatorial deﬁnition of the non-
uniformly hyperbolic dynamics which would serve both the one-dimensional (strongly
dissipative) case, like e.g. in Jakobson theorem [34] and the 2-dimensional case (e.g.
for the positive entropy conjecture). So far there are three examples of such dynamics:
one-dimensional quadratic maps (e.g. implying Jakobson theorem) [63], a non-uniformly
hyperbolic horseshoe of dimension close to 6/10 [51], and Hénon-like endomorphisms [9]
(implying Benedicks-Carleson Theorem [8]).
1240         P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



1.4. Isotopy to identity and renormalization

   It is well-known that any symplectic diﬀeomorphism F : D → R2 is isotopic to identity
[17], which implies that it can always be represented as a composition F = fn ◦ · · · ◦ f1 of
n symplectic diﬀeomorphisms fi , each of which is uniformly O(1/n)-close to the identity
map. Thus, one could try to prove the Herman’s conjecture by using the Ruelle-Takens
construction [55]: take as F in this formula an appropriate area-preserving map with a
stochastic island, then consider n-disjoint ε-disks i Di = ψi (D) inside D (where ψi are
uniform aﬃne contractions) and take a perturbation f of the identity map such that
f (Di ) = Di+1 and f |Di is smoothly conjugate to fi , i.e., f |Di = ψi+1 ◦ fi ◦ ψi−1 for
i = 1, . . . , n − 1, and f |Dn = ψ1 ◦ fn ◦ ψn−1 . Then, f n |D1 will be smoothly conjugate to
F and, hence, would have positive metric entropy. However, since the conjugates ψi−1
expand with a rate at least ε−1 , we observe that the C r -norm of f is then  1/(nεr ).
As the n discs Di are disjoint, it follows that nε2 ≤ 1, so f can, a priori, be  ε2−r far,
in the C r -norm, from the identity.
   Therefore, this construction does not produce the result for r ≥ 2, although one
can create C 1 -close to identity maps with positive metric entropy in this way (in fact,
every area-preserving dynamics can be realized by iterations of C 1 -close to identity
maps exactly by this procedure). In [47], Newhouse-Ruelle-Takens pushed forward the
argument to obtain the C 2 -case for torus maps. Fayad [24] also proposed a trick to cover
the C 2 -case for disk maps, but his method does not work in the C r -case if r ≥ 3.
   We bypass the problem by using symplectic polynomial approximations of [57] instead
of the isotopy. In this way, one C r -approximates any symplectic diﬀeomorphism F by the
product fn ◦ · · · ◦ f1 of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms of a very particular form (Hénon-like
maps). For these maps, the conjugating contractions ψi can be made very non-uniform,
allowing for an arbitrarily good approximation of every dynamics by iterations of C r -close
to identity maps for all r, see [59]. The product fn ◦ · · · ◦ f1 is only an approximation
of F , and it is still not known if every area-preserving dynamics can be exactly realized
by iterations of C r -close to identity maps. The main technical novelty of this paper is to
show that some maps with stochastic islands can.

1.5. Stochastic sea and elliptic islands

   The main motivation for the positive metric entropy conjecture is the amazing com-
plexity of dynamics of a typical area-preserving map. Let us stress that no conservative
dynamics are understood with certainty, except for those which are semi-conjugate to
a rotation [2] or to an Anosov map. The reason is that hyperbolic and non-hyperbolic
elements are often inseparable.
   Thus, it was discovered by Newhouse [48,50] that a uniformly-hyperbolic Cantor set
can be wild, i.e., its stable and unstable manifolds can have tangencies, and these non-
transverse intersections cannot all be removed by any C 2 -small perturbation of the map.
              P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288        1241



Moreover, Newhouse showed [49] that a C r -small perturbation of an area-preserving map
with a wild set creates elliptic periodic orbits which accumulate to the wild hyperbolic set.
    Newhouse theory was applied and further developed by Duarte. He showed in [20]
that for all a large enough the “chaotic sea” observed in the standard map (3) contains
a wild hyperbolic set K, and for a Baire generic subset of this interval of a values the
map has inﬁnitely many generic elliptic periodic points, which accumulate on K. Recall
that a generic elliptic point of period k for a map f is surrounded, in its arbitrarily
small neighborhood, by uncountably many smooth circles (KAM-curves), invariant with
respect to f k . The map f k restricted to such curve is smoothly conjugate to an irrational
rotation (so the Lyapunov exponent is zero). The set occupied by the KAM curves has
positive Lebesgue measure, and their density tends to 1 as the elliptic point is approached.
An invariant curve bounds an invariant region that contains the elliptic point, such
regions are called elliptic islands.
    In [21,22], Duarte showed that small perturbations, within the class Diﬀ rω , of any
area-preserving surface diﬀeomorphism with a homoclinic tangency (the tangency of
the stable and unstable manifolds of a saddle periodic orbit) lead to creation of a wild
hyperbolic set and to inﬁnitely many coexisting elliptic points (and elliptic islands). In
turn, it was shown in [27,45] that near any elliptic point a homoclinic tangency to some
saddle periodic orbit can be created by a C r -small perturbation.
    Altogether, this gives a quite complicated picture of generic conservative dynamics:
within the stochastic sea there are elliptic islands, inside elliptic islands there are small
stochastic seas, etc. By [27,29], it is impossible to describe such dynamics in full detail.
In fact, even most general features are presently not clear: for instance, we have no idea
if the observed stochastic sea represents a transitive invariant set, or if it has a positive
Lebesgue measure (though, by Gorodetski [31], it may contain uniformly-hyperbolic
subsets of Hausdorﬀ dimension arbitrarily close to 2).
    The inherent inseparability of the hyperbolic and elliptic behavior even suggests the
following provocative question, communicated to us by Fayad.

Question 1.2. Does an open set of area-preserving C ∞ -diﬀeomorphisms exist with the
following property: for each diﬀeomorphism belonging to this subset the complement to
the union of the KAM curves has zero Lebesgue measure?

   Maps with this property have zero metric entropy, so our Theorem A implies the
negative answer to this question (a KAM curve is always a limit of non-hyperbolic
periodic points). However, it is still possible that a generic (i.e., belonging to a countable
intersection of open and dense subsets) non-hyperbolic map from Diﬀ ∞       ω has zero metric
entropy.
   In [4], the complement U to the set of all essential invariant curves of a symplectic twist
map was considered. Any connected component of U (the Birkhoﬀ “instability zone”) is
bounded by two invariant topological circles C1 and C2 . It is shown in [4], that either Ci
is a heteroclinic link (a scenario as much improbable as exhibiting a stochastic island,
1242           P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



e.g., it is impossible for entire maps), or the Lyapunov exponent of any invariant measure
supported by Ci is zero (i = 1, 2). By the results of Furman [25], the latter alternative
implies that the convergence2 of any orbit in the instability zone to one of these curves
Ci is at most sub-exponential. Thus, it is hard to see how a transitive invariant set with
strictly positive maximal Lyapunov exponents can have Ci in its closure, if Ci is not a
heteroclinic link.
   The twist property is fulﬁlled near a generic elliptic point, hence the results of [4] hold
true there. Therefore, it seems probable that if the Sinai conjecture is correct, then the
positive metric entropy is achieved by sets distant from KAM curves. This seems to be
consistent with the numerical observations [44].

1.6. Stochastic perturbation of the standard map

   In higher dimension, more possibilities exist for creating examples with positive metric
entropy. Thus, it was shown in [10] that, for large values of the parameter a, a skew prod-
uct of the standard map over an Anosov map is non-uniformly hyperbolic and displays
non-zero Lyapunov exponents for Lebesgue almost every point. Recently, Blumenthal-
Xue-Young [14] used a similar argument for random perturbations of the standard map
with large a and also showed the positivity of metric entropy.

1.7. Genericity results

   A recent breakthrough by Irie and Asaoka [6] showed, from a cohomological argument,
that for any closed surface (M, ω) a generic map from Diﬀ ∞   ω (M) has a dense set of pe-
riodic points. Hence, if such map is weakly-stable, then it has a dense set of hyperbolic
periodic points. A natural conjecture is, then, the structural stability of weakly-stable
maps from Diﬀ ∞ ω (M); this would be a counterpart of the “Lambda lemma” from holo-
morphic dynamics [11,23,40,42].
   Another natural conjecture would be that the weakly-stable maps from Diﬀ rω (M)
are uniformly hyperbolic, 1 ≤ r ≤ ∞. For r = 1 this result have been proven by
Newhouse [49]. For any r ≥ 2 this question is open, as well as its dissipative counterpart
– a conjecture by Mañé [41], which is also proven only for r = 1 [3]. Since uniformly
hyperbolic maps from Diﬀ rω (M) have positive metric entropy, this conjecture and our
Theorem A would imply that maps with positive metric entropy are dense in Diﬀ ∞    ω (M).
   Because of the meagerness of the heteroclinic links, the genericity of positive metric
entropy does not follow from our result. In fact, one can conjecture that a Cωr -generic
surface diﬀeomorphism is either uniformly hyperbolic, or of zero entropy. We do not have
an opinion in this regard. In the C 1 -topology, this statement was a conjecture by Mañé,
now proven by Bochi [15]; in higher regularity it is completely open.

 2
   By the works of Birkhoﬀ, Mather, and Le Calvez [13,38,43], there exists an orbit whose α-limit set is in
C1 and the ω-limit set is in C2 .
              P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288       1243



  A milder version of this problem can be formulated as the following question due to
Herman [33]:

Question 1.3. Given a surface (M, ω), is there an open subset of Diﬀ rω (M) where maps
with zero metric entropy are dense?

   A candidate for such dense set could be a hypothetical set of maps from Question 1.2
(the maps for which the union of all KAM curves would have full Lebesgue measure).
Note that by the upper semi-continuity of the maximal Lyapunov exponent, a positive
answer to Question 1.3 would also imply the local genericity of maps with zero metric
entropy.

1.8. Universal dynamics

   In [57], the richness of chaotic dynamics in area-preserving maps was characterized
by the concept of a universal map. Given a Cωr -diﬀeomorphism f (r = 1, . . . , ∞) of
a two-dimensional surface (M, ω), its behavior on ever smaller spatial scales can be
described by its renormalized iterations deﬁned as follows. Let Q be a C r -diﬀeomorphism
into M from some disc in R2 . Assume that the domain of deﬁnition of Q contains the unit
disc D and the domain of Q−1 in M contains f n (Q(D)) for some n ≥ 0. We also assume
that the Jacobian det (DQ) is constant in the chart (x, y) on M where the area-form ω
is standard: ω = dx ∧ dy.

Deﬁnition 1.4. The map D → R2 deﬁned as

                                 F̂Q,n = Q−1 ◦ f n |Q(D) ◦ Q

is a renormalized iteration of f .

   Note that since the Jacobian of Q is constant, all renormalized iterations of f preserve
the standard area-form in R2 .

Deﬁnition 1.5 (Universal map). A diﬀeomorphism f ∈ Diﬀ ∞     ω (M) is universal if the set of
its renormalized iterations is C ∞ -dense among all orientation-preserving, area-preserving
diﬀeomorphisms D → R2 .

   By this deﬁnition, the dynamics of a single universal map approximate, with arbitrar-
ily good precision, all symplectic maps of the unit disc.
   In the general non-conservative context this notion was used in [58,59]. In C 1 category,
the concept of universal dynamics was independently proposed by Bonatti and Diaz [16].
   The universal dynamics might sound diﬃcult to materialize, but it is not. It is shown
in [29] that an arbitrarily small, in Cω∞ , perturbation of any area-preserving map with
a homoclinic tangency can create universal dynamics. Moreover, universal maps form a
1244             P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



Baire generic subset of the Newhouse domain - the open set in Diﬀ ∞  ω (M) comprised of
                                                              ∞
maps with wild hyperbolic sets. In [27], it was shown that a Cω -generic diﬀeomorphism
of M with an elliptic point is universal.3
   Consequently, any diﬀeomorphism f ∈ Diﬀ ∞    ω (M) with an elliptic point can be per-
turbed in such a way that its iterations would approximate any given area-preserving
dynamics and, in particular, the dynamics with positive metric entropy. We stress
that this observation is not suﬃcient for a proof of our Theorem A. Indeed, if f is
a Cω∞ -diﬀeomorphism with an elliptic point and g is a Cω∞ -diﬀeomorphism of D with
positive metric entropy, the only thing we can conclude from [27,29] is that arbitrarily
close to f in Diﬀ ∞
                  ω (M) there exists a diﬀeomorphism whose iteration restricted to a
certain disc is smoothly conjugate to a map G which is as close as we want to g in
Diﬀ ∞
    ω (D). However, this map G does not need to inherit the positive metric entropy
from g. Overcoming this problem is the main technical point of this paper.

2. Proof of the main theorem

   We start with constructing a map with a stochastic island with certain additional
properties. In section 3, we give a precise description of the construction similar to those
in [5,35,54], which produces a Cω∞ -diﬀeomorphism F̌ : D → D with a stochastic island
I bounded by four heteroclinic bi-links {Ľai ∪ Ľbi : 0 ≤ i ≤ 3}. Each Ľai ∪ Ľbi is a
C ∞ -embedded circle included in the stable and unstable manifolds of hyperbolic ﬁxed
points P̌i , Q̌i :

                                 Ľai ∪ Ľbi ⊂ W u (P̌i ; F̌ ) ∪ W s (Q̌i ; fˇ) .

The island of F̌ is depicted in Fig. 1. For every F which is C 1 -close to F̌ , for every
0 ≤ i ≤ 3, the hyperbolic continuations of P̌i and Q̌i are the uniquely deﬁned hyperbolic
F -periodic orbits close to P̌i and Q̌i .
   We also show the following

Proposition 2.1. For every conservative map F which is C 2 -close to F̌ , let Pi and Qi be
hyperbolic continuations of P̌i , Q̌i . If {W u (Pi ; F ) ∪ W s (Qi ; F ) : 0 ≤ i ≤ 3} deﬁne four
heteroclinic bi-links {Lai ∪ Lbi : 0 ≤ i ≤ 3} which are C 2 -close to {Ľai ∪ Ľbi : 0 ≤ i ≤ 3},
then they bound a stochastic island. In particular, the metric entropy of F is positive.

   The proof is given by Corollary E of Theorem D in Section 3. It follows from a new
and short argument which implies also some results of [5].
   We will call a stochastic island robust relative link preservation if it satisﬁes this
property: for every C r -small perturbation of the map, if the stable and unstable man-
ifolds that form the heteroclinic link do not split, then they bound a stochastic island.

 3
     The results in [27,29] were also proven in the space of real-analytic area-preserving maps.
               P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288             1245




                                      Fig. 1. Stochastic island.


Proposition 2.1 shows that the stochastic island Iˇ of the map F̌ satisﬁes this robustness
property (with any r ≥ 2), and the same holds true for the islands bounded by the four
heteroclinic bi-links {Lai ∪ Lbi : 0 ≤ i ≤ 3} (if these links exist) of any map C 2 -close to
F̌ .
     In Section 4 (see Proposition 4.7), we construct a coordinate transformation φ̊ ∈
Diﬀ ∞ ω (R ) such that I̊ := φ̊(I) is a “suitable” island for F̊ := φ̊ ◦ F̌ ◦ φ̊
          2                                                                     −1
                                                                                   . The suitability
conditions are described in Deﬁnition 4.6. They include the requirement that certain
segments of the stable and unstable manifolds of the hyperbolic ﬁxed points P̊i := φ̊(Pi )
and Q̊i = φ̊(Qi ), 0 ≤ i ≤ 3, are strictly horizontal, i.e., they lie in the lines y = const
where (x, y) are coordinates in R2 . Moreover, the map F̊ near these segments has a
particular form, which allows us to establish the following result in Section 5 (this is the
central point of our construction):

Proposition 2.2. Given any ﬁnite r ≥ 2, for every F ∈ Diﬀ r+8  ω (D) which is C
                                                                                r+8
                                                                                    -close
to F̊ , there exists a C r -small function ψ : R → R such that the map F̄ deﬁned as

                     F̄ = Sψ ◦ F , where Sψ := (x, y) → (x, y + ψ(x)) ,

has the following property: For the hyperbolic continuations Pi and Qi of the ﬁxed points
P̊i and, respectively, Q̊i , the union W s (Pi ; F̄ ) ∪ W u (Qi ; F̄ ) deﬁnes a heteroclinic bi-link
Lai ∪ Lbi which is C r -close to L̊ai ∪ L̊bi , for each i = 0, . . . , 3.

Remark 2.3. We notice that by Proposition 2.1, the map F̄ = Sψ ◦ F has a stochastic
island, robust relative link preservation, and its metric entropy is positive.

   With this information, we can now complete the proof of the main theorem.
Proof of Theorem A. Let f ∈ Diﬀ ∞   ω (M) have a non-hyperbolic periodic point. By an
arbitrarily small perturbation of f one can make this point elliptic. Then, by [27], by a
Cω∞ -small perturbation of f , one can create, in a neighborhood of the elliptic point, a
1246           P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288




Fig. 2. Construction of a ﬂat homoclinic tangency from [27]: Given an area-preserving map with an elliptic
periodic point O, one can add a C ∞ -small perturbation such that the ﬁrst-return map in a small neighbor-
hood of O will be integrable. A change of rotation number at O leads to the birth of a resonant garland
where the stable and unstable manifolds of a hyperbolic q-periodic point coincide.


hyperbolic periodic cycle whose stable and unstable manifolds coincide (those deﬁne two
heteroclinic links), see Fig. 2.
   The important thing here is that by a small perturbation of the original map f , we
create a periodic point with a ﬂat homoclinic tangency. After that, we apply the following
result, proven in Section 6 (see the proof after Corollary 6.3).

Proposition 2.4. Let f ∈ Diﬀ ∞ ω (M) have a hyperbolic periodic point with a ﬂat homoclinic
tangency. Then, there exists a C ∞ -dense (residual) subset F of Diﬀ ∞         2
                                                                        ω (D, R ) such that
for every F ∈ F, every r ≥ 2, every C r -smooth function ψ : R → R, and every ε > 0,
there exists a diﬀeomorphism fˆ ∈ Diﬀ rω (M) such that
• dr (f, fˆ) < ε, where dr is the C r -distance,
• the composition Sψ ◦ F is equal to a renormalized iteration of fˆ, where Sψ (x, y) =
(x, y + ψ(x)).

    This statement is an enhanced version of the “rescaling lemma” (Lemma 6) of [29].4
    This proposition gives us much freedom in varying the renormalized iteration of fˆ
without perturbing F (by composing with Sψ for an arbitrarily functional parameter ψ).
    The renormalized iterations are described by Deﬁnition 1.4. Since a renormalized
iteration is C r -conjugate to an actual iteration of the map fˆ restricted to some small
disc, it follows that by taking F and ψ exactly as in Proposition 2.2, (so that Sψ ◦ F will
have a stochastic island, see Remark 2.3), we will obtain that the map fˆ has a stochastic
island too, robust relative link preservation.
    The stochastic island for the map F̂ := Sψ ◦ F is bounded by 4-bi-links, each of which
is equal to a C r -embedded circle. As Sψ ◦ F is smoothly conjugate to fˆn for some n > 0,
it follows that the stochastic island for the map fˆ is bounded m = 4n heteroclinic bi-links
and is robust relative link preservation. We denote them by (Lai ∪ Lbi )mi=1 . We prove the
following result in Section 5.5:

 4
   While in [29] the rescaling was done for a single round near the homoclinic tangency, here we do many
rounds, similar to [59].
              P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288        1247



Proposition 2.5. Given any map fˆ ∈ Diﬀ rω (M) with a stochastic island I bounded by
bi-links (Lai ∪ Lbi )m
                     i=1 such that each bi-link Li ∪ Li is a C -embedded circle, arbitrarily
                                                   a   b         r

                   ˆ                      ˆ          ∞
close in C to f there exists a map f∞ ∈ Diﬀ ω (M) for which the bi-links persist (i.e.,
               r

the hyperbolic continuations of the stable and unstable manifolds forming each bi-link
(Lai , Lbi ) comprise a heteroclinic bi-link for the map fˆ∞ , C r -close to (Lai , Lbi ) ).

   The map fˆ with the stochastic island lies in the ε-neighborhood of the original map f
in Diﬀ rω (M). Since the stochastic island of the map fˆ is robust relative link preservation,
the map fˆ∞ also has a stochastic island and, hence, positive metric entropy.
   This shows, that arbitrarily close, in C r for any given r, to the original map f there
exists a map fˆ∞ ∈ Diﬀ ∞ ω (M) with positive metric entropy.      2

3. Stochastic island

   In this Section we describe a particular example of a stochastic island (see Fig. 1). It
is somewhat similar to the Przytycki’s development of the Katok’s construction, in the
sense that the holes in the island are bounded by heteroclinic links. A diﬀerence with the
Przytycki’s example is that the heteroclinic links form smooth circles in our construction.
Similar examples were considered by Aubin-Pujals [5] in the non-conservative case.

3.1. An Anosov map of the torus

   Let T 2 be the torus R2 /Z2 . Let S1 be the circle R/(2πZ). We endow R2 and T 2 with
the symplectic form ω = dx ∧ dy.
   Consider the following linear Anosov diﬀeomorphism of T 2 :

                       FA : (x, y) → A(x, y) := (13x + 8y, 8x + 5y)                      (4)

(FA is the third iteration of the standard Anosov example (x, y) → (2x + y, x + y)).
The map FA preserves the area form ω and is uniformly hyperbolic, e.g. its Lyapunov
exponents are non-zero.
   The map FA has four diﬀerent ﬁxed points Ω0 = (0, 0), Ω1 = ( 12 , 12 ), Ω2 = ( 12 , − 12 ),
Ω3 = (− 12 , 12 ). Let σ > 0 be the logarithm of the unstable eigenvalue of the matrix A:
               √
σ = ln(9 + 4 5). We may put the origin of coordinates to one of the points Ωi and make
a symplectic linear transformation of the coordinates (x, y) such that the map FA near
Ωi will become

                             Ωi + (x, y) → Ωi + (eσ x, e−σ y) .

Observe that FA is the time-σ map by the ﬂow of the system

                           ẋ = ∂y Hi (x, y),    ẏ = −∂x Hi (x, y)
1248         P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



associated with the Hamiltonian

                                             Hi = xy .

  Note that the transition to polar coordinates (ρ, θ) near Ωi by the rule
                                                 
                             (x, y) = ( 2ρ cos(θ), 2ρ sin(θ))                                (5)

preserves the symplectic form, i.e., we have ω = dρ ∧dθ. The map FA in these coordinates
is the time-σ map by the ﬂow deﬁned by the Hamiltonian function

                                    Hi (θ, ρ) = ρ sin(2θ) .                                  (6)

The corresponding Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld is

                          d                         d
                             ρ = 2ρ cos(2θ),           θ = − sin(2θ).
                          dt                        dt
We do not need an explicit expression for the map FA in the symplectic polar coordinates;
just note that near the point Ωi this map has the form (ρ, θ) → (ρ̄, θ̄) where

                                ρ̄ = ρ p0 (θ),      θ̄ = q0 (θ),                             (7)

and p0 and q0 are C ∞ -functions S1 → R. Since this map preserves the symplectic form
dρ ∧ dθ, its Jacobian p0 (θ)∂q0 (θ) equals to 1, so p0 (θ) = 0 and ∂q0 (θ) = 0.

3.2. Stochastic island in T 2

   In order to construct a chaotic island, we shall “blow up” the four points Ωi . This
means that we will take some small δ > 0, consider the closed δ-discs Vi with the center
at Ωi for each i = 0, 1, 2, 3, and build a C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism Ψ of T 2 \ {0≤i≤3 Vi } onto
T 2 \ {∪i Ωi }. We will do it in such a way that the map Ψ−1 ◦ FA ◦ Ψ will be smoothly
extendable to a C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism F̂ of T 2 . Then the invariant set Iˆ = T 2 \ {i Vi }
will be a stochastic island for F̂ . Moreover, the points Ωi will be ﬂat ﬁxed points of F̂
and, importantly, F̂ will inherit the symmetry with respect to (−id) from the map FA
– this will be used at the next step in Section 3.4.
   Let ε > 0 be such that the map FA is the time-σ map of the Hamiltonian ﬂow
deﬁned by (6) in the closed ε-disc Vi about Ωi , i = 0, 1, 2, 3; we assume that the discs
Vi are mutually disjoint. Let 0 < δ < ε and let Vi  Vi be the closed δ-discs about Ωi ,
i = 0, 1, 2, 
             3.               
               δ 2 ε2        ε2
   Let ψ :        ,     → 0,      be a C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism such that
                2 2           2

                     δ2                      δ2                                       ε2
        ψ(ρ) = ρ −        if ρ is close to        and ψ(ρ) = ρ     if ρ is close to      .   (8)
                     2                       2                                        2
              P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288          1249



Let Ψi ∈ C ∞ (T 2 \ int(Vi ), T 2 ) be equal to the identity outside Vi and let the restriction
of Ψi to the smaller disc Vi be given by

                                   Ψi |Vi : (θ, ρ) → (θ, ψ(ρ))                             (9)

in the polar coordinates (5). The radius-δ circle ∂Vi about Ωi is sent by Ψi to Ωi . Note
that Ψi is a diﬀeomorphism from T 2 \ Vi onto T 2 \ Ωi and Ψi commutes with (−id).
Note also that in a neighborhood of ∂Vi the map Ψi preserves the form ω = dρ ∧ dθ.
   Deﬁne

              Ψ = Ψi in Vi \ Vi for i = 0, 1, 2, 3 and Ψ = id in T 2 \ {i Vi }.         (10)

This map is a C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism from Iˆ = T 2 \{i Vi } onto T 2 \{∪i Ωi } and it commutes
with (−id).
   Denote F̂ = Ψ−1 ◦ FA ◦ Ψ. By construction, this is a C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism of I,     ˆ which
commutes with (−id). In a small neighborhood of the circles ∂Vi the map F̂ preserves
symplectic form dρ ∧ dθ and, by (6),(8),(9), it coincides in this neighborhood with the
time-σ map of the ﬂow deﬁned by the symplectic form dρ ∧ dθ and the Hamiltonian

                                   Ĥi = (ρ − δ 2 /2) sin(2θ) .

We can, therefore, smoothly extend F̂ inside Vi (i.e., to ρ ≤ δ 2 /2) as the time-σ map of
the ﬂow deﬁned by the smoothly extended Hamiltonian Ĥi :

                                 Ĥi = (ρ − δ 2 /2) sin(2θ)ξ(ρ) ,                          (11)

where ξ is a C ∞ -function, equal to zero at all ρ close to zero and equal to 1 at all
ρ ≥ δ 2 /2.
   We summarize some relevant properties of the map F̂ in the following

Proposition 3.1. The map F̂ is a C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism of T 2 such that:

 1. F̂ |T 2 \{i Vi } is conjugate to FA |T 2 \{∪i Ωi } via a C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism Ψ;
 2. the set Iˆ := T 2 \ {i Vi } is invariant with respect to F̂ ;
 3. F̂ preserves a smooth symplectic form ω̂;
 4. F̂ commutes with (−id), and ω̂ is invariant with respect to (−id);
 5. F̂ equals to the identity in a small neighborhood of the points Ωi ;
 6. each circle ∂Vi is a heteroclinic 4-link.

Proof. Claim 1 is given just by construction of F̂ . Claim 2 follows from it by continuity
of F̂ : since Ωi are ﬁxed points of FA , each disc Vi is invariant with respect to F̂ . Claim 5
follows since Ĥi is constant near Ωi , so the corresponding vector ﬁeld is identically zero
there.
1250         P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



   Claim 3: By claim 1, the map F̂ preserves the symplectic form ω̂ = Ψ∗ ω in T 2 \{i Vi }.
Since Ψ∗ ω = dρ ∧ dθ = ω near ∂Vi (as it follows from (8),(9)), we can smoothly extend
ω̂ onto the whole torus by putting ω̂ = ω in i Vi . Since F̂ |Vi is the time-σ map by a
Hamiltonian ﬂow, the form ω̂ = ω inside the discs Vi is preserved by F̂ .
   Claim 4 follows since both the original map FA and the conjugacy Ψ commute with
(−id), the Hamiltonians Ĥi that deﬁnes F̂ inside the discs Vi (see (11)) are invariant
with respect to (−id) : θ → θ + π, and the symplectic form ω is invariant with respect
to (−id).
   In order to prove claim 6, notice that by (11) the map F̂ near ∂Vi : {ρ = δ 2 /2} is the
time-σ map of the system

                       d                               d
                          ρ = 2(ρ − δ 2 /2) cos(2θ),      θ = − sin(2θ).                 (12)
                       dt                              dt

This system has 4 saddle equilibria on the circle ρ = δ 2 /2: θ = 0, π/2, π, 3π/2. These
equilibria are hyperbolic ﬁxed points of F̂ , and the invariant arcs of the circle ρ = δ 2 /2
between these points are formed by their stable or unstable manifolds. 2

3.3. The island is robust relative link preservation

   The following statement establishes that the set Iˆ is a stochastic island for F̂ . It also
concerns the dynamics of perturbations of F̂ . Similar results were obtained by Aubin-
Pujals in [5] for the non-conservative case. The proof is given by a new and shorter
argument.

Theorem D. For the map F̂ , as well as for every, not necessarily conservative, diﬀeo-
morphism F̃ which is C 2 -close to F̂ and keeps the circles ∂Vi invariant (i = 0, 1, 2, 3),
all points in Iˆ have positive maximal Lyapunov exponent. The maps F̃ and F̂ are topo-
logically conjugate on ˆI; all such maps are transitive.

Proof. By (7),(8),(9), the map F̂ near ∂Vi can be written as (ρ, θ) → (ρ̄, θ̄) where

                                  δ2       δ2
                           ρ̄ =      + (ρ − )p0 (θ),    θ̄ = q0 (θ) .
                                  2        2
                                                                                            2
A C 2 -small perturbation F̃ of F̂ which keeps the circle ∂Vi invariant must send ρ = δ2
          2
to ρ̄ = δ2 , so it has the form

                      δ2       δ2
               ρ̄ =      + (ρ − )(p0 (θ) + p(θ, ρ)),     θ̄ = q0 (θ) + q(θ, ρ) ,
                      2        2

where the function p is C 1 -small and q is C 2 -small.
  By reversing our surgery (10), we obtain a diﬀeomorphism F̃A = Ψ ◦ F̃ ◦ Ψ−1 of
IA := T 2 \ ∪i {Ωi }, which takes the following form near Ωi (see (8),(9)):
             P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288             1251


                                            δ2                                   δ2
              ρ̄ = ρ · (p0 (θ) + p(θ, ρ +      )),     θ̄ = q0 (θ) + q(θ, ρ +       ).
                                            2                                    2

  The following Lemma enables us to compare F̃A with FA deﬁned in (4).

Lemma 3.2. In the Cartesian coordinates, the restrictions F̃A and FA to IA = T 2 \∪i {Ωi }
are uniformly C 1 -close.
                                              √         √
Proof. The transformation (ρ, θ) → (x, y) = ( 2ρ cos θ, 2ρ sin θ) to Cartesian coordi-
nates near Ωi has the following property
                                                                  1
                          ∂(x,y) ρ ≤    2ρ,        ∂(x,y) θ ≤ √ .                        (13)
                                                                   2ρ

Thus, the map F̃A near Ωi takes the form (x, y) → (x̄, ȳ) where
                     √                                      √
             x̄ =    2ρ p0 + p cos(q0 + q),          ȳ =    2ρ p0 + p sin(q0 + q).

The uniformly-hyperbolic map FA is given by
                               √                                √
                       x̄ =    2ρ p0 cos(q0 ),       ȳ =       2ρ p0 sin(q0 )

(see (7)). Recall that p0 (θ) = 0 for all θ.
                                              √
   It follows that, F̃A (x, y) = FA (x, y) + ν 2ρ φ(ρ, θ) near Ωi where ν = (p, q)C 1 ∼
F̃ − F̂ C 2 is small and φ is uniformly bounded along with its ﬁrst derivatives with
respect to ρ and θ. By (13), this gives us that near the points Ωi
                                                                         
                                   ∂(x,y) ρ                             
                                  
         ∂(x,y) (F̃A − FA ) = ν  √        φ + 2ρ ∂(ρ,θ) φ ∂(x,y) (ρ, θ)              2
                                       2ρ                                  = O(ν).

  This lemma implies the following:

Lemma 3.3. For the map F̃ , every z ∈ Iˆ displays a positive Lyapunov exponent.

Proof. We have found that the map F̃A : IA → IA is uniformly close in C 1 to the
uniformly-hyperbolic map FA in a neighborhood of the ﬁxed points Ωi (even though
the derivative of F̃A may be not deﬁned at the points Ωi ). Since the 4 ﬁxed points
Ωi are the only singularities of the surgery transformation Ψ, the derivative of F̃A is
uniformly close to the derivative
                                  of FA everywhere on IA , i.e., DF̃A is uniformly close
                          13 8
to (x, y) → A(x, y) =           (x, y) (see (4)). In particular, DF̃A takes every vector
                           8 5
with positive coordinates to a vector with positive coordinates and at least 4 times larger
norm. Hence,

                                         DF̃An (P ) ≥ 4n                                   (14)
1252          P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



for every point P ∈ IA .
   The map F̃ : Iˆ → Iˆ is smoothly conjugate to F̃A = Ψ ◦ F̃ ◦ Ψ−1 , so


              DF̃ n (Ψ−1 (P )) ≥ DF̃An (P )/(DΨ(F̃An (P ) · DΨ−1 (P ))

for every P ∈ IA . If the point P is chosen such that the iterations F̃ n (Ψ−1 (P )) do not
                                                                                      n
converge to ∪i ∂Vi , then there is a sequence nj → +∞ such that the iterations F̃A j (P )
stay away from the points Ωi - the only singularities of the conjugacy map Ψ−1 . Thus,
             n
both DΨ(F̃A j (P ) and DΨ−1 (P ) are bounded away from zero in this case. It follows
then from (14) that

                     1                                  1
                       log DF̃ n (Ψ−1 (P )) ≥ lim sup
                                                                  n
           lim sup                                        log DF̃A j (P ) ≥ ln 4 .
            n→∞      n                           nj →∞ nj


By deﬁnition, this means that the maximal Lyapunov exponent of Ψ−1 (P ) for the map
F̃ is strictly positive.
    In the remaining case, if all iterations of the point Ψ−1 (P ) by F̃ converge to ∪i ∂Vi ,
they must converge to one of the saddle ﬁxed points that lie in ∪i ∂Vi (since every
F̂ -pseudo-orbit which remains close to ∂Vi , is necessarily eventually close to one of the
saddle point of Vi ). In this case, the maximal Lyapunov exponent of Ψ−1 (P ) equals to
the maximal Lyapunov exponent of the saddle point, i.e., it is positive. Thus, in any
case, every point of Iˆ has positive maximal Lyapunov exponent for the map F̃ . 2

   By the uniform hyperbolicity of FA (see Lemma 3.2), using a variation of the Moser’s
technique [46] of the proof of Anosov structural stability theorem [1], we prove:

Lemma 3.4. There exists a homeomorphism h of T 2 which conjugates FA and F̃A , and
leaves each Ωi invariant.

   This lemma implies the topological conjugacy between F̃ |Iˆ and F̂ |Iˆ. The transitivity
of F̃ |Iˆ follows from the transitivity of FA |T 2 \{∪i Ωi } by the conjugacy. This completes the
proof of Theorem D. 2

Proof of Lemma 3.4. The map FA induces an automorphism on the Banach space Γ of
bounded continuous vector ﬁelds γ vanishing at Ωi , i = 0, 1, 2, 3:


                                  FA : γ → DFA ◦ γ ◦ FA−1 .

The hyperbolicity of FA (it uniformly expands in the unstable direction and uniformly
contracts in the stable direction) implies that the linear operator id − FA has a bounded
                P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288                      1253



inverse.5 By the implicit function theorem, this implies that the ﬁxed point γ = 0 of
FA is unique, and every (nonlinear) operator on Γ which is C 1 -close to FA has a unique
ﬁxed point close to γ = 0. In particular, the operator

                                   γ → F̃A ◦ (id + γ) ◦ FA−1 − id ,

has a unique ﬁxed point γ. By the construction, the map h = id + γ satisﬁes:

                                            h ◦ FA = F̃A ◦ h .

Thus, F̃A and FA are semi-conjugate, and we have that

                                            h ◦ FAn = F̃An ◦ h                                          (15)

for every integer n, positive and negative.
   In order to prove the topological conjugacy between FA and F̃A , it remains to show
that the continuous map h is injective. This is done as follows: if h(P ) = h(Q), then
h(FAn P ) = h(FAn Q) for all n ∈ Z, by (15). Since h is uniformly close to identity, it follows
that FAn P is uniformly close to FAn Q, i.e., An (P − Q) is uniformly small for all n ∈ Z.
By the hyperbolicity of the matrix A, this gives P = Q, as required. 2

3.4. Stochastic island in the disc

     It is easy to see that the result of the factorization π of the 4-punctured torus T 2 \
∪3i=0 {Ωi } over (−id) : (x, y) → (−x, −y) is a 4-punctured sphere. One can realize the
smooth map π : T 2 \ ∪i {Ωi } → S2 e.g. by a Weierstrass elliptic function6 ; see also [35].
    Each ﬁber of π is a pair of points (x, y) and −(x, y). Since F̂ commutes with (−id) in
our construction, and F̂ is the identity map in a neighborhood of each of the points Ωi
(i = 0, 1, 2, 3) where π is singular, the push-forward F̌ = π ◦ F̂ ◦ π −1 of F̂ is a well-deﬁned
C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism of the sphere S2 . As the symplectic form ω̂, which is preserved by
F̂ , is invariant with respect to (−id), it follows that the push-forward of ω̂ by π is a
smooth symplectic form ω̌ on S2 \ ∪i {Ωi }, and ω̌ is invariant by F̌ . Note that the form
ω̌ can get singular at the points πΩi , but we can smoothen ω̌ in an arbitrary way near
these points; since F̌ is the identity map there, it preserves any smooth area form near
πΩi . Hence F̌ leaves invariant a smooth symplectic form ω̌.
    By construction, the set Iˇ = π Iˆ is the stochastic island for the map F̌ (the island Iˆ
is at a bounded distance from the singularities Ωi , so π −1 realizes a smooth conjugacy

                                                                                               
 5
    As FA is a linear map, it is easy to provide an explicit formula for id − FA    : if (id − FA )γ = β, then
       ∞     −nσ       −n      ∞    −nσ
γ = n=0 e        βs ◦ FA − n=1 e         βu ◦ FA , where βs and βu are the projections of β to the stable and,
                                               n

respectively, unstable directions of FA , and e±σ are the eigenvalues of FA , σ > 0.
 6
    or, if we realize the 4-punctured sphere as the surface {Z 2 + η(X, Y ) = 1, |X| ≤ 1, |Y | ≤ 1} in
                               √
R3 , where η = (X 2 + Y 2 + 1 − X 2 − Y 2 + X 4 +     Y − X Y )/2, then π can be explicitly deﬁned as
                                                          4    2 2

π(x, y) = (X = 2|x| − 1, Y = 2|y| − 1, Z = sign(xy) 1 − η(X, Y )), |x| ≤ 1/2, |y| ≤ 1/2.
1254          P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



between F̌ |Iˇ and F̂ |Iˆ, which takes heteroclinic links to heteroclinic links and keeps the
maximal Lyapunov exponent positive). Note that the 4-links ∂Vi are invariant with
respect to (−id). The map π glues the opposite points of ∂Vi together, hence the circles
π(∂Vi ) that bound the island Iˇ are heteroclinic bi-links.
   Now we will transform the stochastic island Iˇ on S2 to a stochastic island for a map
of the plane. Let us identify S2 with the one-point compactiﬁcation of R2 , where πΩ0 is
identiﬁed with ∞; this can be done e.g. by the stereographic projection π0 : (S2 \πΩ0 ) →
R2 . As F̌ is equal to the identity at a neighborhood of Ω0 , after the projection to R2 , the
map F̌ will be a C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism and will be equal to the identity at a neighborhood
of inﬁnity. The form ω̌ will become a symplectic form on R2 and it will be preserved
by F̌ . Let ω̌ = β(x, y)dx ∧ dy for some smooth function β = 0. The diﬀeomorphism
                                 y
π1 : (x, y) → (X = x, Y = 0 β(x, s)ds) of R2 onto a domain D ⊂ R2 transforms ω̌ to
the standard symplectic form dX ∧ dY . The map F̌ takes D to D in the coordinates
(X, Y ) and is equal to identity near the boundary ∂D, so it can be extended onto the
whole of R2 as the identity map outside of D; it will still preserve the standard form
dX ∧ dY . By performing an additional scaling π2 : (X, Y ) → (κX, κY ) we can achieve
that F̌ = id everywhere outside the unit disc D. Thus the image by π2 ◦ π1 ◦ π0 of the
stochastic island Iˇ on S2 will lie inside D; it is a stochastic island I for the map F̌
(because Iˇ is separated from πΩ0 , so the map π2 ◦ π1 ◦ π0 is a smooth conjugacy).
   We have shown the existence of a diﬀeomorphism F̌ ∈ Diﬀ ∞     dX∧dY (D) with a stochastic
island I. Note that Proposition 2.1 from Section 2 is satisﬁed for this island, as easily
follows from Theorem D:

Corollary E. The stochastic island I for the map F̌ ∈ Diﬀ ∞ (D) is robust relative link
preservation.

Proof. The island I is bounded by four heteroclinic bi-links Li = π2 ◦ π1 ◦ π0 ◦ π(∂Vi ),
i = 0, 1, 2, 3. For every F which is C 2 -close to F̌ , if F does not split the links, then it is
C 2 -conjugate to a C 2 -diﬀeomorphism of D which is C 2 -close to F̌ and keeps the links Li
invariant. Lifting this diﬀeomorphism to the torus T2 by π −1 ◦ π0−1 ◦ π1−1 ◦ π2−1 , we obtain
a diﬀeomorphism F̃ of T2 \ {∪i=0,1,2,3 Ωi } which preserves the links ∂Vi and is C 2 -close
to F̂ on I.ˆ By Proposition D, the map F̃ has positive maximal Lyapunov exponent at
every point of ˆ  I. Since the smooth conjugacy does not change the Lyapunov exponent,
the map F has positive maximal Lyapunov exponent a every point of the island bounded
by the continuations of the links Li . 2

4. Geometric model for a suitable stochastic island

   Now, we choose a particular coordinate system in R2 such that the map F̌ and its
stochastic island I we just constructed will acquire certain suitability properties (as given
by Deﬁnition 4.6; see Fig. 4).
   Let F ∈ Diﬀ ∞     2
                ω (R ) have a heteroclinic link L.
             P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288      1255



Deﬁnition 4.1. A fundamental interval of L for the map F is a closed segment D1 ⊂ L
such that F (D1 ) ∩ D1 is exactly one point – an endpoint both to D1 and F (D1 ). Given
m ≥ 1, an m-fundamental interval Dm of L is the union Dm = ∪m−1         i
                                                                  i=0 F (D1 ) of the m
ﬁrst iterates of a certain fundamental interval D1 .

   Let (x, y) be symplectic coordinates in R2 , so ω = dx ∧ dy. Below we always ﬁx the
orientation in R2 such that the x-axis looks to the right and the y-axis looks up.

Deﬁnition 4.2. An m-fundamental interval Dm of a heteroclinic link L will be called
straight if Dm is included in a straight line y = const.

    It is a well-known fact (see [26]) that any m-fundamental interval Dm can be straight-
ened and the so-called time-energy coordinates can be introduced in its neighborhood,
i.e., the map near Dm becomes a translation to a constant vector. We formulate this
result as

Lemma 4.3. If L is a link between two hyperbolic ﬁxed points P and Q for F ∈
Diﬀ ∞
    ω (R ) and Dm ∈ L is an m-fundamental interval, then there exists a symplectic
         2

C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism φ from a neighborhood of Dm into R2 such that φ(Dm ) is a straight
m-fundamental interval for φ ◦ F ◦ φ−1 and, in a neighborhood of φ(Dm ),

                            φ ◦ F ◦ φ−1 =: (x, y) → (x + τ, y)

for some constant τ = 0.

Proof. Put P to the origin of coordinates and bring the map to the Birkhoﬀ normal
form by a symplectic C ∞ coordinate transformation [17, Thm. 1]. This means that we
introduce symplectic coordinates (x, y) near P such that the map F near P will be given
by

                        (x, y) → (exp(q(xy)) · x, exp(−q(xy)) · y)                  (16)

for some function q ∈ C ∞ (R, R) with q(0) > 0. Note that the unstable manifold of
P is given by y = 0 in these coordinates. By iterating F forward, we can extend the
domain of the Birkhoﬀ coordinates to a small neighborhood of any compact subset
of W u (P ). In particular, we may assume that the map F is given by (16) near the
m-fundamental interval Dm . Observe that Dm := {(x, y) : x̃ ∈ [x0 , emq(0) x0 ], y = 0}
in these coordinates, for some x0 = 0 (by making, if necessary, the coordinate change
(x, y) → −(x, y), we can always make x0 > 0).
   Let h = q. Obviously, F is the time-1 map of the ﬂow deﬁned by the Hamiltonian
                                   ln x
H(x, y) = h(xy). Put X(x, y) :=         and Y (x, y) = h(xy). The map (x, y) → (X, Y )
                                 q(xy)
       ∞
is a Cω -coordinate change near Dm which conjugates F with (X, Y ) → (X + 1, Y ). 2
1256            P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288




                   Fig. 3. Suitable intersection of a heteroclinic bi-link with two strips.



   Note that the map (x, y) → (x + τ, y) is the time-τ map by the vector ﬁled ẋ =
1, ẏ = 0 deﬁned by the Hamiltonian H(x, y) = y. Therefore, x plays the role of time
and the conserved quantity y can be viewed as energy, which justiﬁes the “time-energy”
terminology.

4.1. Making a bi-link suitable

   A vertical strip V is the region {(x, y) : x ∈ [c1 , c2 ], y ∈ R} in R2 for some c1 < c2 .

Deﬁnition 4.4 (Suitable intersection of a heteroclinic bi-link with two strips). Two vertical
strips V a and V b intersect a heteroclinic bi-link (L̊a , L̊b ) of a dynamics F̊ in a suitable
way if:

 • the intersection of V a with L̊a is a straight 2-fundamental interval D2a ;
 • the intersection of V b with L̊b is the disjoint union of a straight 2-fundamental
   interval D̊2b and a straight 4-fundamental interval D̊4b ;
 • the strip V b does not intersect L̊a ;
 • there exists τ > 0 such that the map F̊ in restriction to a neighborhood of D̊2a is
   given by (x, y) → (x − τ, y) and, in restriction to a neighborhood of D̊2b , it is given
   by (x, y) → (x + τ, y);
 • there exists n ≥ 1 such that F̊ n sends D̊2b ∪ F̊ 2 (D̊2b ) to D̊4b , and the restriction of F̊ n
   to a neighborhood of D̊2b is

                                                              1
                                        F̊ n : (x, y) → θ − ( x, 2y)
                                                              2

       for some θ ∈ R2 .

See Fig. 3 for an illustration.

   In Lemma 4.5 below, we are going to show that any conservative diﬀeomorphism F
with a bi-link (La , Lb ) is smoothly conjugate to a conservative diﬀeomorphism F̊ with
              P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288                1257



a suitable bi-link (L̊a , L̊b ). This means that we have a lot of geometric freedom in the
choice of the bi-link (L̊a , L̊b ), that we shall explain.
   Take any two parallel straight lines in R2 : {y = y1 } and {y = y2 } with y2 < y1 . Let
τ > 0 and xa < xb so that xa + τ < xb − τ . Consider the two vertical strips:

              V a := [xa − τ, xa + τ ] × R     and     V b := [xb − τ, xb + τ ] × R.

Consider any C ∞ -smooth circle L̊ in R2 equal to the union of two curves L̊a , L̊b satisfying:

 • L̊ = L̊a ∪ L̊b and L̊a ∩ L̊b = ∂ L̊a = ∂ L̊b .
 • L̊a ∩ V a = [xa − τ, xa + τ ] × {y1 } and L̊a ∩ V b = ∅.
 • L̊b ∩ V b = [xb − τ, xb + τ ] × {y1 , y2 }.

Now we can state:

Lemma 4.5. Let F ∈ Diﬀ ∞    2                                a   b
                        ω (R ) have a heteroclinic bi-link (L , L ). Then there exists a
symplectic C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism φ̊ of a small neighborhood of La ∪ Lb into R2 such that:

 • φ̊(La ∪ Lb ) = L̊, φ̊(La ) = L̊a , φ̊(Lb ) = L̊b ;
 • the vertical strips V a and V b intersect the bi-link (L̊a , L̊b ) of φ̊ ◦ F ◦ φ̊−1 in a suitable
   way (with n = 4 in Deﬁnition 4.4).

Proof. Let us take fundamental intervals Da of La and Db of Lb . Observe that:

 • D2a := Da ∪ F (Da ) and D2b := Db ∪ F (Db ) are 2-fundamental intervals of La and Lb ,
   respectively;
 • D4b := ∪7i=4 F i (Db ) is a 4-fundamental interval of Lb .

We remark that D2b and D4b are included in the 8-fundamental interval D8b := ∪7i=0 F i (Db )
of Lb .
   By Lemma 4.3, there exist symplectic diﬀeomorphisms φa and φb acting from a neigh-
borhood of D̂2a := D2a ∪ F (D2a ) and, respectively, a neighborhood of D̂8b = D8b ∪ F (D8b )
into R2 such that:

 • φa (D2a ) = [−2, 0] × {0} and φa ◦ F ◦ (φa )−1 is the translation to (−1, 0) in a neigh-
   borhood of φa (D2a );
 • φb (D8b ) = [0, 8] × {0} and φb ◦ f ◦ (φb )−1 is the translation to (1, 0) in a neighborhood
   of φb (D8b ).

Observe that φb (D2b ) = [0, 2] × {0} and φb (D4b ) = [4, 8] × {0}.
  Let δ > 0 be small and denote J := [−δτ, δτ ] and J  := [− δτ        δτ
                                                                    2 , 2 ]. Let

  B2a := (φa )−1 ([−2, 0] × J),      B2b := (φb )−1 ([0, 2] × J),   B4b := (φb )−1 ([4, 8] × J  ) .
1258         P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



For δ > 0 small enough, the sets B2b , B4b and B2a are disjoint. Take two linear area-
preserving maps:

                                    y                              τ 2
               A2 := (x, y) → (τ x, )      and A4 := (x, y) → − ( x, y) .
                                    τ                              2 τ
Notice that the maps

                   φ̊a2 := A2 ◦ φa ,      φ̊b2 := A2 ◦ φb ,        φ̊a4 := A4 ◦ φb

send, respectively, B2a , B2b and B4b onto translations of R := [−τ, τ ] × [−δ, δ].
   Let φ̊0 be a symplectic embedding of a neighborhood of the disjoint union B0 :=
B2a ∪ B2b ∪ B4b into R2 such that:

 • B2a , B2b and B4b are sent by φ̊0 onto, respectively, (see Fig. 3):

               B̊2a := R + (xa , y1 ),   B̊2b := R + (xb , y1 ),     B̊4b := R + (xb , y2 );

 • the restriction of φ̊0 to neighborhoods of B2a , B2b and B4b is the composition of re-
   spectively φ̊a2 , φ̊b2 and φ̊b4 with some translations.

Note that φ̊0 sends the fundamental intervals D2a , D2b and D4b onto, respectively,:

             D̊2a := [−τ, τ ] × {0} + (xa , y1 ),   D̊2b := [−τ, τ ] × {0} + (xb , y1 ),
             D̊4b := [−τ, τ ] × {0} + (xb , y2 ),

so these images lie in the curve L̊, in the intersection with the vertical strips V a and Vb .
   The map φ̊0 ◦ F 4 ◦ φ̊−1           b        b                                          b
                         0 sends D̊2 into D̊4 and its restriction to a neighborhood of D̊2 is
the composition of a translation with the linear map (x, y) → (−x/2, −2y), as required
by Deﬁnition 4.4 with n = 4. Therefore, to prove the lemma, it suﬃces to construct a
symplectic C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism φ̊ of a small neighborhood of B0 ∪ La ∪ Lb into R2 which
would send La , Lb to L̊a , L̊b , such that its restriction to a neighborhood of B0 would be
equal to φ̊0 .
   Without the symplecticity requirement, the map φ̊ would be given by Whitney ex-
tension theorem [62]. Making the diﬀeomorphism φ̊ symplectic requires an extra eﬀort,
as it is done below.
   Consider an annulus A := (R/Z) × [−η, η] for a suﬃciently small η > 0. Let t ∈
R/Z and h ∈ [−η, η] be coordinates in A. By the Weinstein’s Lagrangian neighborhood
theorem [61], if η is suﬃciently small, then there exists an area-preserving diﬀeomorphism
N from the annulus A to a neighborhood of the bi-link La ∪ Lb , which sends the central
circle S := {h = 0} to La ∪ Lb . Similarly, there exists an area-preserving diﬀeomorphism
N̊ from A to a small neighborhood of the curve L̊ = L̊a ∪ L̊b , which sends S to L̊.
   Let δ > 0 be small enough, so that the sets B0 and φ̊0 (B0 ) will be contained in N (A)
and, respectively, N̊ (A). By Whitney extension theorem, there exists G ∈ Diﬀ ∞ (A, A)
               P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288                  1259



such that G(S) = S and N̊ ◦ G ◦ N −1 restricted to a neighborhood U of B0 is φ̊0 . In
particular, detDG|N −1 (U ) = 1. The map G is orientation-preserving but it is not, a priori,
area-preserving outside of U .
   Our goal is to correct G in order to make it area-preserving. More precisely, we are
going to construct a C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism Ψ of A such that detDΨ = detDG, Ψ(S) = S,
and the restriction of Ψ to N −1 (B0 ) is the identity. Then the Lemma will be proved by
taking φ̊ := N̊ ◦ G ◦ Ψ−1 ◦ N −1 .
   Let us keep ﬁxed the neighborhood U of B0 where G is area-preserving, and let us
take δ > 0 small. Then B0 can be made as close as we want to D2b ∪ D4b ∪ D2a . Hence,
for δ > 0 small enough, if the image by N of a vertical segment {t = const, |h| ≤ η}
intersects B0 , then it lies entirely in U , i.e., detDG = 1 everywhere on this segment.
Therefore, if we deﬁne the map

                                                    h
                                Ψ : (t, h) → (t,        detDG(t, s)ds),
                                                    0


then Ψ = id in the restriction to N −1 (B0 ). It is also obvious, that Ψ = id in restriction
to the central circle S = {h = 0}, and detDΨ = detDG. 2

4.2. Making the stochastic island suitable

    Consider the map F̌ ∈ Diﬀ ∞   ω with the stochastic island I. Recall that I is bounded
by 4 heteroclinic bi-links (Lai , Lbi ), i = 0, 1, 2, 3, each of which is a C ∞ -smooth circle. We
take a convention that La0 ∪Lb0 is the outer circle, i.e., the bi-links (Lai , Lbi ) with i = 1, 2, 3
lie inside the region bounded by La0 ∪ Lb0 .
    Below, we will construct symplectic coordinates φ̊ in R2 such that the island φ̊(I) will
satisfy the following suitability conditions.

Deﬁnition 4.6 (Suitable intersection of 4 heteroclinic bi-link-s with 4 pairs of vertical
strips). We say that 4 pairs of vertical strips (Via , Vib ), i = 0, 1, 2, 3, intersect bi-links
(L̊aj , L̊bj ), j = 0, 1, 2, 3 in a suitable way if the following conditions hold true.

(H1 ) For every 0 ≤ i ≤ 3, the intersection of Via  Vib with (L̊ai , L̊bi ) is suitable in the
      sense of Deﬁnition 4.4, with n = 4.
(H2 ) For every j ≥ 1 and every i = j, the strips Via and Vib do not intersect the circle
      L̊aj ∪ L̊bj

See Fig. 4 for an illustration.

Proposition 4.7. There exist φ̊ ∈ Diﬀ ∞        2                                            a
                                          ω (R ) and 4 pairs of vertical strips Vi , Vi , i =
                                                                                                 b

0, 1, 2, 3, which intersect the heteroclinic bi-links (L̊aj = φ̊(Laj ), L̊bj = φ̊(Lbj )), j = 0, 1, 2, 3,
of the map F̊ = φ̊ ◦ F̌ ◦ φ̊−1 in a suitable way.
1260          P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288




                Fig. 4. Suitable intersection of the stochastic island and 8 vertical strips.


Proof. By Lemma 4.5, for every i = 0, 1, 2, 3 there exists a pair of vertical strips Via , Vib
and a symplectic C ∞ diﬀeomorphism φ̊i of a small neighborhood of the bi-link (Lai , Lbi )
such that the strips Via , Vib intersect (L̊ai , L̊bi ) := (φ̊i (Lai ), φ̊i (Lbi )) of the map F̊i :=
φ̊i ◦ F̌ ◦ φ̊−1
             i  in a suitable way, ensuring the fulﬁllment of Condition (H1 ) of Deﬁnition 4.6.
    Note that in Lemma 4.5 there is a freedom in the choice of the curve L̊i = φ̊i (Lai ∪Lbi ).
So, we take L̊i such that it will bound a disc of the same area as Li = Lai ∪ Lbi does. Also,
by choosing the constants y1 , y2 , x0 , x1 in Lemma 4.5 in an appropriate way for each i,
we can assure that φ̊i (Li ) do not intersect for diﬀerent i and φ̊1 (L1 ) ∪ φ̊(L2 ) ∪ φ̊(L3 ) lies
inside the disc bounded by φ̊0 (L0 ), and the strips Via and Vib are positioned where we
wish, thus ensuring Condition (H2 ) of Deﬁnition 4.6.
    Let Ai be a suﬃciently small closed annulus around Li , i = 0, 1, 2, 3. Let us prove
the proposition by showing the existence of a symplectic extension φ̊ of the symplectic
maps φ̊i from a neighborhood of the annuli Ai to the whole of R2 , i.e., a diﬀeomorphism
φ̊ ∈ Diﬀ ∞   ω such that φ̊|Ai = φ̊i |Ai for all i = 0, 1, 2, 3. Since the curve L̊i bounds the
disc of the same area as Li = Lai ∪ Lbi does, for each i, the annuli Ai is necessarily such
that the area of each of the connected components of R2 \ i Ai equals to the area of a
corresponding component of R2 \ i φ̊i (Ai ). Then the existence of the sought symplectic
extension φ̊ is a standard consequence of Dacorogna-Moser theorem [19], as given by

Corollary 4.8 (Cor. 4 [7]). Let K ⊂ R2 be a compact set, U be a neighborhood of K and let
ψ ∈ Cω∞ (U, R2 ) be close to the identity. Assume that every bounded connected component
W of R2 \ U and its corresponding one in R2 \ ψ(U ) have the same area. Then there
exists φ ∈ Dif fω∞ (R2 ) which is C ∞ -close to the identity and such that φ|K = ψ|K. 2

5. Restoration of broken heteroclinic links

   Let F̊ ∈ Dif fω∞ (R2 ) be the map constructed in the previous Section. It has a stochas-
tic island I̊ bounded by 4 smooth circles - heteroclinic bi-links (L̊ai , L̊bi ), i = 0, 1, 2, 3.
The bi-link L̊a0 ∪ L̊b0 forms the outer boundary of I̊. By construction, there exist 4 pairs
of vertical strips (Via , Vib ) which intersect (L̊ai , L̊bi ) in a suitable way in the sense of Def-
               P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288                 1261



inition 4.6. We denote Via = Iia × R and Vib = Iib × R, where Iia , Iib are closed disjoint
intervals in the x-axis.
   In this Section we consider perturbations of the map F̊ and prove Proposition 2.2.
Namely, we show that for every r ≥ 1, for every η > 0, for every F ∈ Diﬀ r+8            ω   which is
suﬃciently close to F̊ in C           r+8
                                          , there exists ψ ∈ C (R, R), supported in ∪i (Ii ∪ Iib ) and
                                                              r                           a

with C -norm smaller than η, such that the map F̄ = Sψ ◦ F has 4 heteroclinic bi-links
          r

(Lai , Lbi ) close to (L̊ai , L̊bi ). We recall that given a function ψ, we denote


                                   Sψ : (x, y) → (x, y + ψ(x)) .

   It is pretty much obvious that to prove this statement, it suﬃces to show

Proposition 5.1. Let r ≥ 1. Let F̊ ∈ Diﬀ r+4  ω   have a heteroclinic bi-link (L̊a , L̊b ) which
intersects two vertical strips V a = I a × R and V b = I b × R in a suitable way. For every
F ∈ Diﬀ r+4
         ω   which is C r+4 -close to F̊ , there exists ψ ∈ C r (R, R) which is C r -small and
supported in I a  I b , such that the map Sψ ◦ F has a bi-link (La , Lb ) close to (L̊a , L̊b ).

   Proposition 2.2 is inferred from this statement as follows.

Proof of Proposition 2.2. Let F be a C r+8 -small perturbation of F̊ . By Proposition 5.1,
for each i = 1, 2, 3 there exists a C r+4 -small function ψi supported in Iia  Iib such that
the map Sψi ◦ F̊ has a bi-link (L̄ai , L̄bi ) close to (L̊ai , L̊bi ). By property (H2 ) of the suitable
intersection (see Deﬁnition 4.6), the vertical strips Via and Vib do not intersect the bi-links
(L̊aj , L̊bj ) for j = i, j > 0. Thus the map Sψi is identity near the bi-links (L̊aj , L̊bj ) with
j = i, j > 0. Therefore, the map Sψ1 +ψ2 +ψ3 ◦ F has 3 bi-links (Lai , Lbi ) close to (L̊ai , L̊bi ),
respectively.
    The map Sψ1 +ψ2 +ψ3 ◦ F is an ω-preserving diﬀeomorphism and is C r+4 -close to F̊ .
Therefore, by applying Proposition 5.1 to this map and the link (L̊a0 , L̊b0 ), we obtain
that there exists a C r -small function ψ0 localized in I0a ∪ I0b such that the map Sψ0 ◦
Sψ1 +ψ2 +ψ3 ◦ F has a bi-link (La0 , Lb0 ) close to (L̊a0 , L̊b0 ). Since V0a and V0b do not intersect
the bi-links (Lai , Lbi ) for i > 0 (by property (H2 ) of the suitable intersection), the map Sψ0
is identity near these bi-links, hence it does not destroy them. Thus, the map F̄ = Sψ ◦ F
with ψ = ψ0 + ψ1 + ψ2 + ψ3 has all 4 bi-links (Lai , Lbi ) as required. 2

Proof of Proposition 5.1. This Proposition follows from the two lemmas below which we
prove in Sections 5.3 and 5.4 respectively.

Lemma 5.2. Under the hypotheses of Proposition 5.1, for every F ∈ Diﬀ kω which is
C k -close to F̊ , k ≥ 3, there exists a C k−2 -small function ψa supported in I a and such
that the map Sψa ◦ F has a link La close to L̊a .
1262          P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



Lemma 5.3. Under the hypotheses of Proposition 5.1, for every F ∈ Diﬀ kω which is
C k -close (k ≥ 3) to F̊ and has a link La close to L̊a , there exists a C k−2 -small function
ψ b supported in I b and such that the map Sψb ◦ F has a link Lb close to L̊b .

   Indeed, if an ω-preserving diﬀeomorphism F is a C r+4 -small perturbation of F , then,
by Lemma 5.2, there exists a C r+2 -small ψa such that the map Sψa ◦ F has the link
La . This map is ω-preserving and is C r+2 -close to F̊ . Therefore, applying Lemma 5.3
to this map, we ﬁnd that there exists a C r -small ψb supported in I b and such that the
map Sψb ◦ Sψa ◦ F = Sψa +ψb ◦ F has the link Lb . As the strip I b × R does not intersect
La , the link La also persists for the map Sψa +ψb ◦ F̂ , which gives Proposition 5.1 with
ψ = ψa + ψb . 2


5.1. Evaluation of the link splitting


    The map F̊ has two saddle ﬁxed points P and Q on the circle L̊a ∪ L̊b . The point P
is repelling on the circle, while Q is attracting on the circle.
    Let W a (P ; F̊ ) and W b (P ; F̊ ) denote the halves of the unstable manifolds of P equal
to, respectively, L̊a \ {Q} and L̊b \ {Q}. Let W a (Q; F̊ ) and W b (Q; F̊ ) be the halves of
the stable manifolds of Q equal to respectively L̊a \ {P } and L̊b \ {P }.
    The points P and Q persist for every C 1 -close map F , and depend continuously on
F . The corresponding manifolds W a (P ; F ), W b (P ; F ), W a (Q; F ) and W b (Q; F ) also
persist, and depend continuously on F as embedded curves of the same smoothness as
F . To avoid ambiguities, we will ﬁx a suﬃciently small neighborhood of the point Q and
then W a (P ; F ) and W b (P ; F ) will denote the two arcs of W u (P, F ) which connect P
with the boundary of this neighborhood and are close, respectively, to W a (P ; F̊ ) and
W b (P ; F̊ ). Similarly, W a (Q; F ) and W b (Q; F ) are the arcs in W s (Q, F ) which connect Q
with the boundary of a small neighborhood of P and are close, respectively, to W a (Q; F̊ )
and W b (Q; F̊ ).
    In general, the links are broken when the map F̊ is perturbed, so W a (P ; F ) and
W b (P ; F ) do not need to coincide with, respectively, W a (Q; F ) and W b (Q; F ).
    In the next two Sections we will show, for a given F ∈ Diﬀ ω                      k
                                                                     k (D) which is C -close to F̊ ,
how to ﬁnd a C k−2 -function ψ such that each of the unions W a (P ; Sψ ◦F ) ∪W a (Q; Sψ ◦F )
and W b (P ; Sψ ◦ F ) ∪ W b (Q; Sψ ◦ F ) forms a heteroclinic link between P and Q.
    In this Section, we obtain formulas for the defect of coincidence between W a (P ; Sψ ◦F )
and W a (Q; Sψ ◦ F ) or W b (P ; Sψ ◦ F ) and W b (Q; Sψ ◦ F ). In order to do that, we shall
use the so-called time-energy coordinates near the fundamental interval D̊2a = Va ∩ La of
the link La and the fundamental domain D̊2b ⊂ Vb ∩ Lb of the link Lb . Recall that by the
suitability conditions (see Deﬁnition 4.4) there exist τ > 0 and (xa , ya ) ∈ D, (xb , yb ) ∈ D
such that D̊2a = {x ∈ [xa − 2τ, xa ]} × {y = ya }, D̊2b = {x ∈ [xb , xb + 2τ ]} × {y = yb }, and
the map F̊ restricted to a small neighborhood N a of D̊2a or a small neighborhood N b of
D̊2b is given by
              P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288       1263



              F̊ |N a := (x, y) → (x − τ, y),     F̊ |N b := (x, y) → (x + τ, y) .    (17)

Deﬁnition 5.4. For an ω-preserving map F , which is C k -close to F̊ , an N a time-energy
chart φa is an ω-preserving diﬀeomorphism from N a ∪ F (N a ) to D which is C k−1 -close
to identity and satisﬁes

                                   φa ◦ F |N a = F̊ ◦ φa |N a .                         (18)

An N b time-energy chart φb is an ω-preserving diﬀeomorphism from N b ∪ F (N b ) to D
which is C k−1 -close to identity and satisﬁes

                                   φb ◦ F |N b = F̊ ◦ φb |N b .                         (19)

   We notice that the identity map is a time-energy chart for F̊ . The time-energy charts
are not uniquely deﬁned, so we will ﬁx their choice below. In our construction the time-
energy charts will be identity near {x = xa } and {x = xb }.
   Once certain time-energy coordinates are introduced in N a ∪ F (N a ), the curves
W (P ; F ) ∩ {N a ∪ F (N a )} and W a (Q; F ) ∩ {N a ∪ F (N a )} become graphs of τ -periodic
   a

functions: the manifolds W a (P ; F ) and W a (Q; F ) are invariant with respect to F which
means that in the time-energy coordinates they are invariant with respect to the trans-
lation to (−τ, 0), see (18),(17). We denote as wau (F, φa ) and was (F, φa ) the τ -periodic
functions whose graphs are the curves φa (W a (P ; F )) and φa (W a (Q; F )), respectively.

Deﬁnition 5.5. The link-splitting function M a (F, φa ) associated to (N a , F, φa ) is the
τ -periodic function equal to wau (F, φa ) − was (F, φa ) at x ∈ [xa − τ, xa ].

   Similarly, let wbs (F, φb ) and wbu (F, φb ) be the τ -periodic functions whose graphs are
the curves φb (W b (Q; F ) and φb (W b (P ; F )).

Deﬁnition 5.6. The link-splitting function M b (F, φb ) associated to (N b , F, φb ) is the
τ -periodic function equal to wbu (F, φb ) − wbs (F, φb ) at x ∈ [xb , xb + τ ].

  By the deﬁnition, the link La or Lb is restored when the function M a or, respectively,
M b is identically zero.
  We start with constructing a C k−1 -smooth time-energy chart for the map F .

Lemma 5.7. There exists a small neighborhood N a of D̊2a and a small neighborhood N b
of D̊2b such that for every ω-preserving diﬀeomorphism F which is C k -close to F̊ , k ≥ 3,
there exists C k−1 -smooth time-energy chart φa and φb , which depend continuously on F
and equal to identity if F = F̊ .

Proof. We will show the proof only for the existence of φa . The proof for φb is identical
up to the exchange of index a to b and (−τ ) to τ .
1264         P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



    Let ρ ∈ C ∞ (R, [0, 1]) be zero everywhere near x = xa and 1 everywhere near x = xa −
τ . Let φ0 (x, y) := (x, y)(1 −ρ(x)) +ρ(x)F̊ ◦F −1 (x, y). The map φ0 is a C k -diﬀeomorphism
from a small neighborhood of {x ∈ [xa − τ, xa ], y = ya } into D, it is C k -close to identity
and equals to the identity near (xa , ya ) and to F̊ ◦ F −1 near (xa − τ, ya ).
    Thus, φ0 satisﬁes

                              φ0 ◦ F ◦ φ−1
                                        0 (x, y) = (x − τ, y) .


in a neighborhood of (xa , ya ) (see (17)). Take a small neighborhood of Da and de-
ﬁne there φa (x, y) = φ0 (x, σ(x, y)) where the C k−1 -function σ satisﬁes σ(x, ya ) = ya
and ∂y σ = detDφ−1  0 (x, σ). By construction, detDφ ≡ 1, i.e., it is an ω-preserving
                                                       a
  k−1
C     -diﬀeomorphism and, since φ0 is C -close to the identity, φa is C k−1 -close to the
                                         k

identity. Since detDφ0 = 1 everywhere near (xa , ya ) and (xa − τ, ya ), we have that σ ≡ y
near these points, so φa ≡ φ0 there. In particular,

                                       φa ◦ F = F̊ ◦ φa

near (xa , ya ).
   It follows that we obtain the required time-energy chart if we extend φa to a small
neighborhood of D̊2a ∪ F̊ D̊2a by the rule

                               F̊ ◦ φa ◦ F −1    if x ∈ [xa − 2τ, xa − τ ],
                     φa =:                                                    2
                              F̊ 2 ◦ φa ◦ F −2   if x ≤ xa − 2τ .

   Now, take some suﬃciently small δ > 0. Consider any map F close enough to F̊ and
let φa,b be the C k−1 time-energy charts for F , deﬁned in Lemma 5.7. Given any close to
zero smooth function ψ(x) supported inside [xa − 2τ + δ, xa − δ], we consider the map

                                         F̄ := Sψ ◦ F                                     (20)

and deﬁne for it the time-energy chart φaψ in the open set N a ∪ F (N a ) such that

                             φa ◦ F ◦ F̄ −1 = φa ◦ S−ψ      if x ≥ xa − τ,
                    φaψ =                                                                 (21)
                                   φa ◦ F 2 ◦ F̄ −2         if x ≤ xa − τ.

Recall that ψ vanishes for x close to xa and for x close to xa − 2τ . Furthermore, if x is
close to xa −τ , then the x-coordinate of F̄ −1 (x, y) is close to xa . Thus, on a neighborhood
of F̄ −1 (x, y), it holds F ◦ F̄ −1 = id and so

               φa ◦ F 2 ◦ F̄ −2 (x, y) = φa ◦ F ◦ F̄ −1 (x, y) = φa ◦ S−ψ (x, y) .

Hence φaψ has no discontinuities at x = xa −τ and the following required conjugacy holds
true:
               P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288             1265



                                     φaψ ◦ F̄ |N a = F̊ ◦ φaψ |N a .                           (22)

    Similarly, for any close to zero smooth function ψ(x) which is supported inside [xb +
δ, xb + 2τ − δ], for the map F̄ given by (20), we deﬁne the time-energy chart φbψ in
N b ∪ F (N b ) by the rule

                                φb ◦ F ◦ F̄ −1 = φb ◦ S−ψ        if x ≤ xb + τ,
                      φbψ =                                                                    (23)
                                      φb ◦ F 2 ◦ F̄ −2           if x ≥ xb + τ,

such that the identity

                                      φbψ ◦ F̄ |N b = F̊ ◦ φbψ |N b                            (24)

holds.
   With this choice of the time-energy charts, for small ψ we have the link-splitting
function M a (Sψ ◦ F, φaψ ) (if ψ is supported inside [xa − 2τ, xa ]) or M b (Sψ ◦ F, φbψ ) (if ψ is
supported inside [xb , xb + 2τ ]). This deﬁnes the operators Ma : ψ → M a (Sψ ◦ F, φaψ ) and
Mb : ψ → M b (Sψ ◦ F, φbψ ) acting from the space of smooth functions supported inside
[xa − 2τ, xa ] or, respectively, inside [xb , xb + 2τ ], to the space of τ -periodic functions of
the same smoothness.

5.2. Regularity of the graph transform operator

    The regularity of the operators Ma and Mb depends on the smoothness class of ψ.
We choose it to be C k−2 . For δ > 0 small, for every x ∈ R we denote by C0k−2 ([x − 2τ +
δ, x − δ], R) the Banach space of real C k−2 -functions supported inside [x − 2τ + δ, x − δ],
endowed with the C k−2 -norm. We have the crucial result:

Proposition 5.8. The operators

         Ma : ψ ∈ C0k−2 ([xa − 2τ + δ, xa − δ], R) → M a (Sψ ◦ F, φaψ ) ∈ C k−2 (R)
         Mb : ψ ∈ C0k−2 ([xb + δ, xa + 2τ − δ], R) → M b (Sψ ◦ F, φbψ ) ∈ C k−2 (R)

are of class C 1 in a small neighborhood of zero, and depend continuously on the map F .

   Proposition 5.8 follows immediately from the two following lemmas:

Lemma 5.9. The functions wau (Sψ ◦ F, φaψ ) and wbu (Sψ ◦ F, φbψ ) are independent of ψ,
and depend continuously on F :

             wau (Sψ ◦ F, φaψ ) = wau (F, φb )   and     wbu (Sψ ◦ F, φbψ ) = wbu (F, φb ) .
1266          P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



Lemma 5.10. The following operators are of class C 1 and depends continuously on F :

            ψ ∈ C0k−2 ([xa − 2τ + δ, xa − δ], R) → was (Sψ ◦ F, φaψ ) ∈ C k−2 (R) ,

             ψ ∈ C0k−2 ([xb + δ, xb + 2τ − δ], R) → wbs (Sψ ◦ F, φbψ ) ∈ C k−2 (R) .

   Lemma 5.10 was rather unexpected: the proof works because Sψ induces a graph
transform which is a translation (which is a smooth operator).

Proof of Lemma 5.9. Let ψ be supported inside [xa − 2τ + δ, xa − δ]. Denote F̄ := Sψ ◦ F .
The graph of the function wau is the curve φaψ (W a (P ; F̄ )) ∩[xa −τ, xa ] ×R. It follows from
our choice of the chart φaψ (see the ﬁrst line of (21)) that this curve is the image by φa ◦ F
of an arc of the curve ua = F̄ −1 (W a (P ; F̄ ) ∩[xa −τ, xa ] ×R), which is an arc of W a (P ; F̄ )
lying at x ≥ xa . The set W a (P ; F̄ ) ∩ {x ≥ xa } is a part of the unstable manifold of P
which depends only on the dynamics at {x ≥ xa }. Since ψ is zero at x ≥ xa , the map
Sψ is identity there, hence F̄ |{x≥xa } equals F |{x≥xa } , and W a (P ; F̄ ) ∩ {x ≥ xa } equals
W a (P ; F ) ∩ {x ≥ xa }, in particular the curve ua does not depend on ψ, i.e. it is the same
for F and F̄ .
   Thus,

           φaψ (W a (P ; F̄ ))|x∈[xa −τ,xa ] = (φa ◦ S−ψ ) ◦ (Sψ ◦ F )(ua ) = φa ◦ F (ua )
                                          = φa (W a (P ; F ))|x∈[xa −τ,xa ] ,

so wau (F̄ , φaψ ) = wau (F, φa ) is the same for all small ψ.
   Exactly in the same way, just by changing the index a to b and the interval [xa − τ, xa ]
to [xb , xb + τ ], we obtain that when ψ is supported inside [xb + δ, xb + 2τ − δ] the function
wbu (F̄ , φbψ ) is independent of ψ. 2

Proof of Lemma 5.10. For c ∈ {a, b}, let us show that wcs (F̄ , φcψ ) is a C 1 function of
ψ ∈ C k−2 (R), with F̄ := Sψ ◦ F . Again, we start with the case c = a and ψ supported
inside [xa − 2τ + δ, xa − δ] and derive the expression for was (F̄ , φaψ ) in this case.
    The graph of was (F̄ , φaψ ) is the curve φaψ ¯as where ¯as is the piece of W a (Q; F̄ ) in the
intersection with (φaψ )−1 ([xa − τ, xa ] × R). The curve W s (Q; F̄ ) (a halve of the stable
manifold of Q) is obtained by iterations of its small, adjoining to Q part by the map
F̄ −1 . The maps F̄ −1 and F −1 coincide at x ≤ xa − 2τ + δ, and both are close to the
map F̊ −1 which takes the line {x = xa − 2τ + δ} ∩ N a into x = xa − τ + δ, so the piece
of W s (Q; F̄ ) between Q and x = xa − τ + δ/2 does not move as ψ varies, i.e., it is the
same as for the map F .
    This means that for all small ψ, the image by F̄ of the curve ¯sa lies inside the piece
of W s (Q; F ) to the left of x = xa − τ + δ/2, i.e., F̄ ¯sa ⊂ F sa , where the ψ-independent
curve sa is a piece of W s (Q; F ) in the intersection with {x ∈ [xa − τ − δ/2, xa + δ/2]}.
So
               P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288                  1267



 φaψ (W a (Q; F̄ ))∩{x ∈ [xa −τ, xa ]} ⊂ φaψ ◦ F̄ −1 ◦F sa = φa ◦S−ψ ◦F −1 ◦S−ψ ◦F sa , (25)

as given by (21),(20).
   Formula (25) states that the graph of was (F̄ , φaψ ) is the image of the ψ-independent
curve sa by the map φa ◦ S−ψ ◦ F −1 ◦ S−ψ ◦ F . Thus, the regularity of the map
ψ → was (F̄ , φaψ ) is determined by the regularity of the corresponding graph transform
operators.
   The following deﬁnes the graph-transform operator F # associated with a smooth map
F.

Fact 5.11 (See Thm 2.2.5. P. 145 [32]). Consider a curve L = {(x, y) : y = w(x)} in
an (x, y)-plane, where w is a C s -smooth function deﬁned on some closed interval, and a
C n -smooth map F : (x, y) → (p(x, y), q(x, y)) (n ≥ s) deﬁned in a neighborhood U of L.
Then, under the condition ∂x p(x, y) + ∂y p(x, y)Dw(x) = 0 everywhere in U , the image
FL is a curve of the form y = w̃(x) where w̃ ∈ C s . Moreover the operator F # which
takes the C s -function w to the C s -function w̃ is of regularity class C n−s .

   Since φa (sa ) is the graph of was (F, φa ), we have from (25) that

    was (F̄ , φaψ ) = (φa )# ◦ (S−ψ )# ◦ (F −1 )# ◦ (S−ψ )# ◦ (F ◦ (φa )−1 )# was (F, φa ) .        (26)

Since φa and F are at least of class C k−1 , the graph-transform operators (φa )# , (F −1 )# ,
and (F ◦ (φa )−1 )# have regularity at least C 1 when act from C k−2 -smooth functions to
C k−2 -smooth functions. We cannot use the same fact for the graph transform operator
induced by S−ψ since the latter map is only of class C k−2 . However, the map S−ψ is
given by (x, y) → (x, y −ψ(x)), so the associated graph transform operator (S−ψ )# sends
a function w to w − ψ. Thus, it is linear in both w in ψ, i.e., it is of class C ∞ with respect
to both w and ψ (irrespective of their class of smoothness).
   Altogether, this implies that the map ψ → was (F̄ , φaψ ) given by (26) is of class C 1 .
    Now, let us handle the case c = b.
    We need to derive the expression for wbs (F̄ , φbψ ). The graph of this function is the curve
φbψ ¯sb where ¯sb is the piece of W b (Q; F̄ ) in the intersection with (φbψ )−1 ({x ∈ [xb , xb +τ ]}).
The curve W b (Q; F̄ ) is close to W b (Q; F̊ ). Recall that W b (Q, F̊ ) coincides with W b (P, F̊ )
and forms a heteroclinic link L̊b . It intersects the vertical strip Vb = {x ∈ [xb , xb + 2τ ]}
twice, along two straight line segments D̊2b = [xb , xb + 2τ ] × {y = yb } and D̊4b = F̊ 4 (D̊2b ) ∪
F̊ 6 (D̊2b ) = [xb , xb + 2τ ] × {y = yb } for some yb < yb . The piece of W b (Q, F̊ ) between Q
and the left end of D̊4b lies entirely in the region x ≤ xb , i.e., to the left of the vertical
strip Vb . Also, the map F̊ in a small neighborhood of D̊4b is given by

                                     F̊ : (x, y) → (x − τ /2, y)                                   (27)

(as implied by the link suitability Deﬁnition 4.4). It follows that the curve W b (Q, F̄ )
intersects the straight line x = xb at a point Zb with the y-coordinate close to yb such that
1268           P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



the piece of W b (Q, F̄ ) between Q and F̄ 7 Zb lies entirely in the region x < xb + τ /2 + δ/2.
Since ψ is supported inside [xb + δ, xb + 2τ − δ], it follows that F = F̄ near this piece
of W b (Q, F̄ ). Therefore, the piece of W b (Q, F̄ ) between Q and x = xb + τ /2 + δ/2 is
unmoved as ψ varies, so it coincides with the corresponding piece of W b (Q, F ).
   This piece contains the point F̄ 7 Zb , hence it contains the curve F̄ 7 ¯bs for all small ψ.
It follows that there exists a ψ-independent curve sb so that F̄ 7 ¯sb ⊂ F 7 sb and sb is a
piece of W s (Q; F ) in the intersection with {x ∈ [xb − δ/2, xb + τ + δ/2]}. So

 φbψ (W b (Q; F̄ ))|x∈[xb ,xb +τ ] ⊂ φbψ ◦ F̄ −7 ◦ F 7 sb = φb ◦ S−ψ ◦ (F̄ −1 ◦ S−ψ )7 ◦ F 7 sb , (28)

see (23),(20).
   Since φb (sb ) is the graph of wbs (F, φb ), we have from (28) that

  wbs (F̄ , φbψ ) = (φb )# ◦ (S−ψ )# ◦ ((F −1 )# ◦ (S−ψ )# )7 ◦ (F 7 ◦ (φb )−1 )# wbs (F, φb ) . (29)

Like we did it for the function was given by (26), we obtain that the map ψ → wbs (F̄ , φbψ )
deﬁned by (29) is of class C 1 . 2

   The continuity of the operators Ma and Mb with respect to F allows us to obtain
enough information about them by computing them for F = F̊ , which we do in the two
following lemmas.

Lemma 5.12. When F = F̊ :

                     Ma (ψ)(x) = ψ(x) + ψ(x − τ )          for x ∈ [xa − τ, xa ].                  (30)

Proof. For F = F̊ , the link La exists and the fundamental interval Da is straight, so the
curves W a (P ; F̊ ) and W a (Q; F̊ ) coincide for x ∈ [xa − τ, xa ] and lie in the straight line
y = ya . The map φa for F̊ is identity, so we have wau (F̊ , φa ) = was (F̊ , φa ) = ya . The map
F̊ is the translation to (−τ, 0) (see (17)). Plugging this information into (26) gives (30)
immediately. 2

Lemma 5.13. When F = F̊ ,

                                                −x                −x                −x
   Mb (ψ)(x) = ψ(x) + ψ(x + τ ) − 12 (ψ( 3xb +τ
                                             2     ) + ψ( 3xb +2τ
                                                               2     ) + ψ( 3xb +3τ
                                                                                 2     )
                   3xb +4τ −x                                                                      (31)
              + ψ(      2     ))

for x ∈ [xb , xb + τ ].

Proof. When F = F̊ , we have φb = id, so

         Mb : ψ → wbu (F̊ , id) − (S−ψ )# ◦ ((F̊ −1 )# ◦ (S−ψ )# )7 ◦ (F̊ 7 )# wbs (F̊ , id)      (32)
              P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288            1269



(see (29)). Recall that W b (Q, F̊ ) coincides with W b (P, F̊ ) and intersects the vertical strip
Vb on two straight line segments, D̊2b = [xb , xb + 2τ ] × {y = yb } and D̊4b = [xb , xb + 2τ ] ×
{y = yb }, so

                      wbu (F̊ , id) = wbs (F̊ , id) ≡ yb at x ∈ [xb , xb + τ ].              (33)

Also, the map F̊ 7 from a small neighborhood of [xb , xb + τ ] × {y = yb } to a small
neighborhood of [xb , xb + τ ] × {y = yb } acts as

                                             x 3xb  τ
                       F̊ 7 : (x, y) → (−     +   + , −2y + 2yb + yb )
                                             2   2  2

(see Deﬁnition 4.4). Therefore,

                        (F̊ 7 )# wbs (F̊ , id) ≡ yb at x ∈ [xb , xb + τ /2] ,

and

        w7 (x) := (S−ψ )# (F̊ 7 )# wbs (F̊ , id)(x) = yb − ψ(x) at x ∈ [xb , xb + τ /2] .

Next, by (27), we obtain

w6 (x) := (S−ψ )# ◦ (F̊ −1 )# w7 (x) = yb − ψ(x − τ /2) − ψ(x) at x ∈ [xb + τ /2, xb + τ ] .

Repeating the same procedure two more times, we obtain

                                                      3                       τ
w4 (x) := ((S−ψ )# ◦ (F̊ −1 )# )3 w7 (x) = yb − ψ(x − τ ) − ψ(x − τ ) − ψ(x − ) − ψ(x) at
                                                      2                       2
           3
x ∈ [xb + τ, xb + 2τ ] .
           2

   The map F̊ −1 takes the rectangle K := [xb + 3τ /2, xb + 2τ ] × [yb − ε, yb + ε] (for
some small ε) to the right of the strip Vb , and its next image F̊ −2 K also lies to the
right of Vb . We recall that the function ψ vanishes there and S−ψ = id. Therefore,
F −1 ◦ (S−ψ ◦ F −1 )2 = F −3 on K. As the curve {y = w4 (x)} lies in K for small ψ, this
implies that

                          (F −1 ◦ (S−ψ ◦ F −1 )2 )# w4 = (F −3 )# w4 .

By the link suitability conditions (Deﬁnition 4.4), the map F −3 takes K into a small
neighborhood of D̊2b and is given by

                                                                y yb
                     F̊ −3 : (x, y) → (−2x + 3xb + 5τ, −         +   + yb ).
                                                                2   2
This gives
1270          P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288


                                                 −x                 −x                −x
 ((S−ψ ◦ F −1 )6 )# w7 (x) = yb + 12 (ψ( 3xb +2τ
                                              2      ) + ψ( 3xb +3τ
                                                                 2     ) + ψ( 3xb +4τ
                                                                                   2     )
                                                3xb +5τ −x
                                         +ψ(         2     )) − ψ(x) at x ∈ [xb + τ, xb + 2τ ] .

Since F̊ −1 is the translation to (−τ, 0) near F̊ (D2b ), we ﬁnally obtain that

                                               −x                −x                −x
((S−ψ ◦ F −1 )7 )# w7 (x) = yb + 12 (ψ( 3xb +τ
                                            2     ) + ψ( 3xb +2τ
                                                              2     ) + ψ( 3xb +3τ
                                                                                2     )
                                   3xb +4τ −x
                              +ψ(       2     )) −  ψ(x + τ ) −  ψ(x)   at  x ∈  [xb +  τ, xb + 2τ ] ,

which implies (31) by (32),(33). 2

5.3. Proof of Lemma 5.2: restoring the link La

   In order to prove Lemma 5.2, we show that for every ω-preserving F which is C k -close
to F̊ there exists a C k−2 -smooth function ψ, supported in x ∈ (xa − 2τ, xa ), such that

                                      M a (Sψ ◦ F, φaψ ) ≡ 0 ,                                  (34)

where the C k−2 -smooth time-energy chart φaψ for the map Sψ ◦ F is deﬁned by (21).
We will solve this equation for ψ by reducing it to a ﬁxed point problem for a certain
contracting operator.
   First, we restrict the class of perturbation functions ψ; namely, we will take them in
the form

                                       ψ(x) = ρ(x)ψ̃(x) ,

where ψ̃ is a τ -periodic function, and ρ ∈ C ∞ (R, [0, 1]) has support in [xa − 2τ, xa ] and
satisﬁes ρ(x) + ρ(x − τ ) = 1 for every x ∈ [xa − τ, xa ]. Then the operator

                                      Maρ : ψ̃ → Ma (ρψ̃) ,

which provides a correspondence between ψ̃ and the link-splitting function for the map
Sρψ̃ ◦ F , takes a small ball around zero in the space C k−2 (R/(τ Z), R) of τ -periodic
functions into the same space.
   By Lemma 5.8, the operator Maρ is of class C 1 on C k−2 (R/(τ Z), R). For F = F̊ , we
have Maρ = id. Indeed, by (30),

       Maρ (ψ̃)(x) = ρ(x)ψ̃(x) + ρ(x − τ )ψ̃(x − τ ) = [ρ(x) + ρ(x − τ )]ψ̃(x) = ψ̃(x) .

Due to a continuous dependence on F , the operator

                                        ψ̃ → ψ̃ − Maρ (ψ̃)

is a contraction in a neighborhood of zero in C k−2 (R/(τ Z), R) for all F ∈ Diﬀ kω (D) which
are C k -close to F̊ . Therefore, it has a unique ﬁxed point ψ̃ near zero in C k−2 (R/(τ Z), R),
for each such F .
               P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288                  1271



   The operator Maρ vanishes at this ﬁxed point. By construction, the corresponding
function ψ = ρψ̃ solves equation (34), i.e., the link-splitting function is identically zero
for the map F̄ = Sψ ◦ F , meaning that the link La persists for this map. Lemma 5.2 is
proven. 2

5.4. Proof of Lemma 5.3: restoring the link Lb

   In order to prove Lemma 5.3, we show that for every ω-preserving F which is C k -close
to F̊ , if the link La persists for the map F , then there exists a C k−2 -smooth function ψ,
supported in x ∈ (xb , xb + 2τ ), such that

                                       M b (Sψ ◦ F, φbψ ) ≡ 0 ,                                     (35)

where the C k−2 time-energy chart φbψ for the map F̄ = Sψ ◦ F is deﬁned by (23).
   In order to resolve equation (35), we will use the following property of the link-splitting
function M b .

Lemma 5.14. If the link La is persistent for the map F , then the link-splitting function
M b (Sψ ◦ F, φbψ ) has zero mean for every ψ supported by (xb , xb + 2τ ):

                                       xb +τ

                                                M (F̄ , φbψ )dx = 0 .
                                       xb


Proof. We may always assume that the map φbψ is the restriction to Na of an area-
preserving diﬀeomorphism or R2 (the possibility of the symplectic extension of an
area-preserving diﬀeomorphism from a disc to the whole R2 is a standard fact; see e.g.
Corollary 4 in [7]).
    Let the points Z u ∈ W b (P, F̄ ) ∩ N b and Z s ∈ W b (Q, F̄ ) ∩ N b have the same
x-coordinate xb , i.e., Z u = (xb , wu (F̄ , φbψ )(xb )), Z s = (xb , ws (F̄ , φbψ )(xb )). As the map F̄
is the translation to (τ, 0) in the time-energy coordinates in N b , the points F̄ Z s and F̄ Z u
have the same x-coordinate xb + τ , and the image of the vertical segment connecting Z s
and Z u is the vertical segment connecting F̄ Z s and F̄ Z u .
    Since the support of ψ lies in (xb , xb + 2τ ), the maps F and F̄ coincide in a neigh-
borhood of La , so the link La is not split for all ψ under consideration. Thus, we may
consider a region D bounded by the link La , the piece of W b (P, F̄ ) between Z u and
P , the piece of W b (Q, F̄ ) between Q and Z s , and the vertical segment that connects
Z s and Z u . The region F̄ D has the same area as D. It is bounded by the link La , the
piece of W b (P, F̄ ) between F̄ Z u and P , the piece of W b (Q, F̄ ) between Q and F̄ Z s ,
and the vertical segment that connects F̄ Z s and F̄ Z u . The equality of the areas means
that the area of the region between the curves W b (P, F̄ ) : {y = wu (F̄ , φbψ )(x)} and
W b (Q, F̄ ) : {y = ws (F̄ , φbψ )(x)} at x ∈ [xb , xb + τ ] is zero (see Fig. 5). This means that
1272         P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288




              Fig. 5. The integral of the function M (F̄ , φ) = wbu (F̄ , φ) − wbs (F̄ , φ) is null.


 xb +τ
 xb
       (wu (F̄ , φbψ ) − ws (F̄ , φbψ ))dx = 0, which proves the lemma (see Deﬁnition 5.6 of the
link-splitting function). 2

  Now, like in the previous Section, we restrict the class of perturbation functions ψ:

                                            ψ(x) = ρ(x)ψ̃(x) ,

where ψ̃ is a τ -periodic function with the zero mean, and ρ ∈ C ∞ (R, [0, 1]) has support
in [xb + δ, xb + 2τ − δ] for δ > 0 small, and satisﬁes ρ(x) + ρ(x + τ ) = 1 for every
x ∈ [xb , xb + τ ]. Then, if the link La persists for the map F , the operator

                                          Mbρ : ψ̃ → Mb (ρψ̃) ,

takes a small ball around zero in the space C0k−2 (R/(τ Z), R) of τ -periodic functions with
the zero mean into the same space (by Lemma 5.14).
   By Lemma 5.8, the operator Mbρ is of class C 1 on C0k−2 (R/(τ Z), R). It follows easily
from (31) that if F = F̊ , then

                                            1      3xb + τ − x         3xb + 2τ − x
              Mbρ (ψ̃)(x) = ψ̃(x) −           (ψ̃(             ) + ψ̃(              )).                (36)
                                            2           2                   2

   Note that the space C0k−2 (R/(τ Z), R) is a Banach space when endowed with the
following norm:

                             ψC k−2 =         max Di ψ1 − Di φ2 C 0 .                              (37)
                                     0       1≤i≤k−2


This norm includes evaluation of the derivatives only (still it is a well-deﬁned norm - if
two functions with the zero mean have the same derivative, they coincide).
   By (31) and by the continuous dependence of Mb on F (see Lemma 5.8), the operator
id − Mbρ is C 1 -close to the linear operator ψ̃ → ψ̄ where

                                   1      3xb + τ − x         3xb + 2τ − x
                       ψ̄(x) =       (ψ̃(             ) + ψ̃(              )).
                                   2           2                   2
We have
              P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288           1273


                            (−1)i         3xb + τ − x            3xb + 2τ − x
               Di ψ̄(x) =         (Di ψ̃(             ) + Di ψ̃(              )),
                             2i+1              2                      2

so this operator is, obviously, a contraction in the norm (37). Therefore, id − Mbρ is
a contraction on C0k−2 (R/(τ Z), R) for all F which are C k -close to F̊ , provided F is
area-preserving and the link La persists for F .
   Thus, id −Mbρ has a ﬁxed point ψ̃. The corresponding function ψ = ρψ̃ solves equation
(35); Lemma 5.3 is proven. 2

5.5. Proof of Proposition 2.5

    The previous results allow for construction of C r -maps with stochastic islands for any
ﬁnite r. Below we prove Proposition 2.5 which deals with the C ∞ case. Let fˆ ∈ Diﬀ rω (M)
have a stochastic island I bounded by bi-links (Lai ∪ Lbi )m   i=1 so that each bi-link Ci :=
Li ∪ Li is a C -smooth circle (without break points). Let us show that arbitrarily close
  a     b       r

in C r to fˆ there exists a map fˆ∞ ∈ Diﬀ ∞  ω (M) for which the bi-links persist.
    Choose a map f ∈ Diﬀ ∞     ω (R2
                                     ) which  is suﬃciently close in C r to fˆ; such exists by
Zehnder smoothing theorem [64, Thm. 1]. The bi-links do not need to persist for f . To
restore them, the idea is to smoothen the circles Ci to C r -close circles C̃i which are of
class C ∞ . Then we will perform a local surgery to construct fˆ∞ of class Cω∞ which is
C r -close to f and such that fˆ∞ (i C̃i ) = i C̃i . By local maximality of the hyperbolic
continuation (P̃i , Q̃i )i of saddle points (Pi , Qi )i deﬁning the bi-links (Lai ∪ Lbi )m
                                                                                         i=1 , it
follows that each P̃i , Q̃i belongs to C̃i . Moreover, as the unique invariant curves which
contain P̃i or Q̃i are their local stable and unstable manifolds, we obtain that the circles
C̃I are heteroclinic bi-links, i.e., the bi-links are persistent for fˆ∞ .
    Consequently, we need only to prove the following

Lemma 5.15. There exists a collection of C ∞ -circles C̃i which are C r -close to Ci , and a
map fˆ∞ of class C ∞ which is C r -close to f , such that fˆ∞ (i C̃i ) = i C̃i .
                    ω


                                                                      dt ) + ( dt ) = 0,
                                                                              dyi 2
Proof. Choose ε > 0 small enough. Let (xi (t), yi (t))t∈S1 , where ( dx i 2

                                        ∞
be a parameterization of a closed C -curve, which is suﬃciently close to Ci in the
C r -topology. Consider the map (t, h) → (x, y) deﬁned as

                                         dyi (t)                            dxi (t)
                  x = xi (t) − z(t, h)           ,   y = yi (t) + z(t, h)           ,
                                           dt                                 dt

where z(t, 0) = 0 and
                                                                              −1
                                dxi 2    dyi 2    d2 xi dyi  d2 yi dxi
                  ∂h z =    (       ) +(    ) + z( 2        − 2        )            .
                                 dt      dt        dt dt     dt dt

It is easy to check that det(∂t,h (x, y)) ≡ 1, so this map is a symplectic C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism
from S1 × {|h| ≤ ε} onto a small neighborhood Vi of Ci in R2 (we think of (x, y) as the
1274           P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



Cartesian coordinates in R2 ). Thus, (t, h) are symplectic coordinates in Vi and the curve
Ci is given by an equation h = σi (t) where σi is C r -small.
    Let C̃i be a curve h = σ̃i (t) where σi is a C ∞ -function, which is suﬃciently close to
σi in C r . By adding a small constant to σ̃i , if necessary, we can ensure that the disc
bounded by the curve C̃i in R2 has the same area as the disc bounded by the curve Ci.
We do this for all i = 1, . . . , m. Recall that the collection of curves Ci is invariant with
respect to the map fˆ and every curve Ci is invariant with respect to some iteration of
fˆ. So, there is j such that Ci = fˆ(Cj ), and Cj is the image of Ci by some iteration of fˆ.
In particular, Cj and Ci bound discs of equal area in R2 . Therefore, the curves C̃i and
C̃j also bound discs of the same area.
    Since C̃j is close to Cj and C̃i is close to Ci = fˆ(Cj ), we can always assume that
the symplectic C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism f (that C r -approximates the map fˆ) is chosen such
that the closed curve f (C̃j ) lies in Vi and has an equation h = σ̊i (t) with some C r -small
function σ̊i . The discs bounded by the curves C̃i and f (C̃j ) in R2 have the same area,
so the area between the curves C̃i and f (C̃j ) is zero, which means that
                                        
                                             (σ̃i (t) − σ̊i (t))dt = 0.
                                        S1


Therefore, on S1 there exists a (C r+1 -small) function Φi (t) such that

                                        d
                                           Φi (t) = σ̃i (t) − σ̊i (t).
                                        dt

   Now, we deﬁne a symplectic diﬀeomorphism φi : Vi → Vi by a generating function
S(t, h̄) = th̄ − Φi (t)ξ(h̄), where ξ is a C ∞ -function which vanishes identically for |h̄| ≥ ε
and equals identically to 1 on the range of values of the function σ̃i . Namely, we deﬁne
φi : (t, h) → (t̄, t̄) implicitly by the rule t̄ = ∂h̄ S, h = ∂t S, or

                                       dξ(h̄)
                     t̄ = t − Φi (t)          ,       h = h̄ − (σ̃i (t) − σ̊i (t))ξ(h̄).          (38)
                                        dh̄

These formulas indeed deﬁne a single-valued map, C r -close to identity, because σ̃i (t) −
σ̊i (t) is C r -small. By construction, the map φi equals to identity at the boundary of Vi
(at |h| = ε), so φi is indeed a diﬀeomorphism of Vi ; it is also immediate that it preserves
the symplectic form dt ∧ dh.
     It remains to note that φi sends the curve f (C̃j ) : h̄ = σ̊i (t̄) to the curve C̃i : h = σ̃i (t)
(since ξ is identically 1 everywhere in the range of σ̃i , it follows from (38) that t̄ = t,
h − σ̊i (t) = h̄ − σ̃i (t̄) for every point (t̄, h̄) ∈ C̃i ). Thus, if we perform this construction
for all i and deﬁne a C r -close to identity symplectic C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism ψ : R2 → R2
as φi inside Vi and identity outside i Vi , then the map fˆ∞ = ψ ◦ f will send the set of
the C ∞ -smooth curves C̃i into itself, as required. 2
                P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288                 1275



6. Rescaling Lemma

   We recall that given U ⊂ R2 , the set Dif fω∞ (U, R2 ) denotes the set of symplectic
diﬀeomorphisms φ from U onto their image. We endow this space with the complete
metric:
                                             
                            dC ∞ (φ, φ̃) =         2−r min(1, φ − φ̃C r ) .
                                               r


   Consider a symplectic C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism f of R2 which has a saddle periodic point
O. Assume that there exists a homoclinic band, i.e., the intersection of the stable and
unstable manifolds of O contains a closed interval J of non-zero length. We assume
that J is suﬃciently small (if not, take its suﬃciently small subinterval), so that J lies
entirely inside a fundamental domain, implying that f m (J) ∩ J = ∅ for all m = 0. By
considering, if necessary, an iterate of J, we also assume that J lies close to O in a local
stable manifold of O.
   Given a function ψ ∈ C r (R), we deﬁne a symplectic Hénon-like map Hψ as

                                      Hψ (x, y) = (y, −x + ψ(y)).                                   (39)

   The following statement enables to produce a perturbation of the dynamics display-
ing a renormalization arbitrarily close to any composition of Hénon-like maps. It is an
improved and more developed7 version of the rescaling lemma from [29]. We recall that
D denotes the closed unit disk of R2 .

Rescaling Lemma 6.1. For every odd N ∈ N, for every r ≥ 1, for all L, δ > 0, and for
every neighborhood UJ of J, there exist:

 • an integer n > 1,
 • symplectic diﬀeomorphisms Φ1 , . . . , ΦN ∈ Dif fω∞ (R2 ) which are δ-close to the iden-
   tity.
 • a C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism Q : R2 → R2 with constant Jacobian satisfying Q(D) ⊂ UJ ,

such that for any functions ψ1 , . . . , ψN ∈ C r (R) whose C r -norms are bounded by L, there
exists a symplectic C r -diﬀeomorphism fˆ which coincides with f on the complement of
UJ and satisﬁes:

                                             fˆ − f C r < δ,                                      (40)
                          −1     ˆn
                       Q       ◦ f ◦ Q|D = HψN ◦ ΦN ◦ · · · ◦ Hψ1 ◦ Φ1 |D ,                         (41)

where Hψi are the symplectic Hénon-like maps deﬁned by (39). Moreover:

7
    The current formulation includes many rounds near a homoclinic tangency; see also Remark 6.2.
1276         P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



                   fˆm ◦ Q(D) ∩ Q(D) = ∅        for al    m = 1, . . . , n − 1.            (42)

Remark 6.2. It is important for us that the maps Φi in formula (41) are independent of
the choice of the functions ψ1 , . . . , ψN .

Corollary 6.3. Let r ≥ 1. Take any symplectic C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism F : D → R2 . For any
δ > 0, L > 0, and a neighborhood UJ of J, there exist:

 • a C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism Q : R2 → R2 with constant Jacobian satisfying Q(D) ⊂ UJ ,
 • a symplectic diﬀeomorphism F̂ : D → R2 which is δ-close to F in the C ∞ -metric,

such that for every function ψ ∈ C r (R) with C r -norm bounded by L, there exists a
symplectic diﬀeomorphism fˆ, which is δ-close to f in the C r -norm, coincides with f on
the complement of UJ , and its renormalization at the disc Q(D) for some n ≥ 1 satisﬁes:

             Q−1 ◦ fˆn ◦ Q|D = Sψ ◦ F̂ ,       with Sψ : (x, y) → (x, y + ψ(x)),          (43)
                   fˆm ◦ Q(D) ∩ Q(D) = ∅        for all   m = 1, . . . , n − 1.            (44)

Proof. By Theorem 2 of [57], every symplectic C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism of any two-
dimensional disc to R2 can be arbitrarily well approximated by a composition of an
even number of Hénon-like maps of the form (39). In particular, for every δ > 0, for the
given C ∞ -diﬀeomorphism F there exists an even number N  of functions ψ1 , . . . , ψN 
such that

                                                                      δ
                           dC ∞ (H0−1 ◦ F, HψN  ◦ · · · ◦ Hψ1 ) <      ,
                                                                      2

where H0 (x, y) = (y, −x) is the Hénon-like map associated to the zero function ψ in
(39). Since H0 is just a linear rotation, it follows that

                                                                     δ
                            dC ∞ (F, H0 ◦ HψN  ◦ · · · ◦ Hψ1 ) <      ,                   (45)
                                                                     2

Note that the map Sψ deﬁned in (43) satisﬁes Hψ = Sψ ◦ H0 . Since N  + 1 is odd, we
can apply the Rescaling Lemma with N = N  + 1 and with the sequence of functions
ψ1 , . . . , ψN  and ψN  +1 ≡ ψ. This gives us the perturbation fˆ to f such that (41) is
fulﬁlled:

 Q−1 ◦ fˆn ◦Q|D = HψN  +1 ◦ΦN  +1 ◦· · ·◦Hψ1 ◦Φ1 |D = Sψ ◦H0 ◦ΦN  +1 ◦· · ·◦Hψ1 ◦Φ1 |D , (46)

for some n > 1. We recall that the Rescaling Lemma asserts that fˆ coincides with f on
the complement of a small neighborhood UJ of J and that Q is a diﬀeomorphism with
constant Jacobian such that Q(D) ⊂ UJ . By (46), we notice that (43) is satisﬁed with:
               P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288         1277



                          F̂ = H0 ◦ ΦN  +1 ◦ HψN  · · · ◦ Hψ1 ◦ Φ1 |D .

Since the maps Φi can be made as close to identity as we want, we can make

                                                                          δ
                            dC ∞ (F̂ , H0 ◦ HψN  ◦ · · · ◦ Hψ1 ) <         ,
                                                                          2

which implies, by (45), that F̂ lies in the δ-small C ∞ -neighborhood of F . Since the maps
Φi are independent of the choice of ψ, it follows that F̂ is independent of the function ψ
either. Note that (44) follows from (42). 2

Proof of Proposition 2.4. Take any L > 0, ε > 0, and any integer r > 0. Consider the
set Fr,ε,L of maps F̂ ∈ Dif fω∞ (D, R2 ) such that for every function ψ ∈ C r (R) whose
C r -norm is bounded by L, in the ε-neighborhood of f in C r there exists a symplectic dif-
feomorphism fˆ for which some renormalized iteration equals to Sψ ◦ F̂ . By Corollary 6.3,
the set Fr,ε,L is dense in Dif fω∞ (D, R2 ).

Claim 6.4. The set Fr,ε,L is open in Dif fω∞ (D, R2 ).

Proof. This is inferred from (44) by the following observation. Let F̂ satisﬁes (43) for
some ψ, Q, and fˆ:

                         fˆ|Q(D) = fˆ−(n−1) ◦ Q ◦ Sψ ◦ F̂ ◦ Q−1 |Q(D) .

Then, for any map F̃ close to F̂ , we take a map f˜ such that it equals to fˆ outside a
small neighborhood of Q(D) and

                         f˜|Q(D) = fˆ−(n−1) ◦ Q ◦ Sψ ◦ F̃ ◦ Q−1 |Q(D) .

If F̃ is close enough to F̂ , then f˜ is close to fˆ too. So, by (44), the discs f˜m ◦ Q(D) stay
at a suﬃcient distance from Q(D) for all m = 1, . . . , n − 1, which means that f˜ ≡ fˆ in
the disc f˜m ◦ Q(D) for all m = 1, . . . , n − 1. By construction, this gives us

                                  Q−1 ◦ f˜n ◦ Q|D = Sψ ◦ F̃ ,

                                         ˜ As the map f˜ can be taken as close as we want
i.e., F̃ is a renormalized iteration of f.
to f if F̃ is close enough to F̂ , we also have that dC ∞ (f˜, f ) < ε. Thus, every F̂ which is
     ˆ
close enough to F̂ lies in Fr,ε,L . 2

     Now, we deﬁne the topologically generic set F ∈ Dif fω∞ (D, R2 ) from Proposition 2.4
as
                                              
                                    F=                  Fr, m1 ,L .   2
                                          (r,m,L)∈N 3
1278             P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



  In the following, we complete the proof of the main theorem by proving the Rescaling
Lemma.

6.1. Local behavior near a nonlinear saddle

   Denote as T0 the restriction of f s to a suﬃciently small neighborhood of O. One
can introduce symplectic C ∞ -coordinates (x, y) such that the local stable and unstable
             s              u
manifolds Wloc  (O) and Wloc  (O) get straightened (i.e., they acquire equations y = 0 and
                                                         s               u
x = 0, respectively) and the restrictions of T0 onto Wloc  (O) and Wloc    (O) become linear
(see Section 2.1 in [29]). This means that the map T0 : (x, y) → (x̄, ȳ) takes the following
form

                               x̄ = λx + p(x, y)x,          ȳ = λ−1 y + q(x, y)y,                    (47)

where 0 < |λ| < 1 and

                                     p(x, 0) = 0,               q(0, y) = 0.                          (48)

Since T0 is symplectic, det(DT0 ) ≡ 1, so

              (λ + ∂x (p(x, y)x))(λ−1 + ∂y(q(x, y)y)) − ∂y p(x, y)∂x q(x, y)xy ≡ 1,

and it is a trivial exercise to check that this identity and (48) imply

                                         p(0, y) = 0,        q(x, 0) = 0.                             (49)

   Identities (48), (49) are important, because they imply nice uniform estimates for
arbitrarily long iterations of T0 . Namely, the following result holds true:

Lemma 6.5 (Lem. 7 in [30]). Let (47)-(49) hold. There exist α > 0 and a sequence of
functions ξk , ηk from U0 := [−α, α]2 into R1 , such that for all k large enough, we have
for all (x, y), (x̃, ỹ) ∈ U0 :
                                                                                                
       T0k (x, y) = (x̃, ỹ)       ⇐⇒              x̃ = λk x + ξk (x, ỹ), y = λk ỹ + ηk (x, ỹ) .   (50)

Moreover, the functions λ−k ξk and λ−k ηk are C ∞ -small when k is large:

                               ∀ρ ≥ 1,     ξk , ηk C ρ = o(λk ) as k → +∞ .                         (51)

    This lemma means that arbitrarily long iterations of T0 are well approximated by the
iterations of its linearization.
    We will look for the perturbed map fˆ in the form fˆ = g ◦ f where g is a close to
identity symplectic diﬀeomorphism. In our construction (g−id) will be supported outside
of f (U0 ), so formulas (50) will stay valid for the perturbed map fˆ = g ◦ f with the same
ξk , ηk , and λ.
               P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288                      1279



6.2. Formulas for the iterations near the homoclinic band

   Recall that the homoclinic band J is assumed to be small enough, so that J ∩f m (J) =
∅ for every m = 0. This also implies that there exists an iteration J + of J that lies in
   s
Wloc  (O) := (−α, α) × {0} and an iteration J − that lies in Wlocu
                                                                   (O) := {0} × (−α, α) such
             −                                   −
that f (J ) = J for some m̄ > 0 and f (J ) ∩ U0 = ∅ for j = 1, . . . , m̄ − 1. We take
       m̄           +                         j

α suﬃciently small, so m̄ is suﬃciently large, in particular m̄ > s (where s is the period
of O). Let U+ ⊂ U0 and U− ⊂ U0 be suﬃciently small neighborhoods of J+ and J− . As
f −1 (J+ ) lies outside U0 , it follows that U+ ∩ f (U0 ) = ∅; similarly, f −1 (U0 ) ∩ U− = ∅.
Note also that

                             f j (U− ) ∩ U0 = ∅ for j = 1, . . . , m̄ − 1.                             (52)

As m̄ > s, we also have that

                                          U+ ∩ T0 (U0 ) = ∅.                                           (53)

Denote

                                             T1 := f m̄ |U− .

   Choose N diﬀerent points Mi− := (0, yi− ) ∈ J − and put Mi+ := (x+                   −
                                                                          i , 0) := T1 Mi .
The perturbation g = fˆ◦ f will be supported in a small neighborhood of the points Mi+ .
Thus, fˆ will coincide with f outside of U+ . We could from the very beginning choose J
           s
lying in Wloc (O) suﬃciently close to O, i.e., assume that J+ = J, Then the neighborhood
UJ in the formulation of the Rescaling Lemma is the neighborhood U+ , so the claim of
the lemma that fˆ coincides with f in the complement of UJ will be fulﬁlled.
   As J − ⊂ {0} × (−α, α) is sent to J + ⊂ (−α, α) × {0}, the map T1 : (x̃, ỹ) → (x, y)
near the point Mi− = (0, yi− ) can be written in the form

                    −                     −
      i + bi (ỹ − yi ) + ϕ1 i (x̃, ỹ − yi ),
 x = x+                                             y = (ci + di (ỹ − yi− ) + ϕ2 i (x̃, ỹ − yi− )) x̃, (54)

where the C ∞ -functions ϕ1 i and ϕ2 i satisfy

             ϕ1 i (0) = 0,       ∂y ϕ1 i (0) = 0,       ϕ2 i (0) = 0,       ∂y ϕ2 i (0) = 0.           (55)

Obviously, this implies that

                       ϕj i (x̃, ỹ − yi− ) = O(|x̃|) + o(|ỹ − yi− |),
                                                                                                       (56)
                       ∂y ϕj i (x̃, ỹ − yi− ) = o(1)(x̃,ỹ−y− )→0 ,      j = 1, 2.
                                                            i


   Note also that the area-preservation property of T1 implies that the coeﬃcients bi , ci
in (54) satisfy
1280         P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288




                                  Fig. 6. Rescaling coordinates.


                              bi ci = −det(DT1 (Mi− )) = −1.                           (57)

6.3. Scaling transformation

    We will further assume that the indices i are deﬁned modulo N , i.e. hereafter i +1 ≡ 1
if i = N and i − 1 ≡ N if i = 1. We will need a sequence of positive real numbers Ri ,
i = 1, . . . N , that satisfy

                               R1 = 1, Ri+1 = −ci+1 bi Ri−1 .                          (58)

Such sequence indeed exists when N is odd: we deﬁne Ri by (58) inductively: R1 , R3 ,
                                                              N     N
... , RN , R2 , ... , RN −1 , until we arrive to RN +1 = (−1)N i=1 ci i=1 bi and notice that
the constraint RN +1 = R1 is satisﬁed by virtue of (57).
    We now perform aﬃne rescaling of the coordinates (x, y) near the points Mi+ and (x̃, ỹ)
near the points Mi− . First, we chose a decreasing sequence (μk )k of scaling constants
μk ∈ (0, 1) which converges to 0 sub-exponentially. In particular, for every ρ ≥ 1, it
holds:

                         μk → 0 and λk · μ−ρ
                                          k → 0 when k → ∞ .                           (59)

  Next, we take a suﬃciently large integer k and deﬁne coordinate transformations

                 Qik : (Xi , Yi ) → (x, y) and Q̃ik : (X̃i , Ỹi ) → (x̃, ỹ) ,

by the following rule:

                                                        −
                x = x+
                     i + bi Ri−1 μk Xi ,       y = λk (yi+1 + γi k + Ri μk Yi ),       (60)
               P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288                       1281



               x̃ = λk (x+
                         i−1 + βi k + bi−1 Ri−2 μk X̃i ),         ỹ = yi− + Ri−1 μk Ỹi ,               (61)

where the constant terms γi k and βi k are given by

                                         − −k                            −      −k
                      βi k = ξk (x+
                                  i−1 , yi )λ ,         γi k = ηk (x+
                                                                    i , yi+1 )λ    .                     (62)

It is obvious that given any real number L̂, if k is large enough, then the map Qik sends
the disc D̂ := {X 2 + Y 2 ≤ L̂2 } into a small neighborhood of Mi+ , whereas the map Q̃ik
sends D̂ into a small neighborhood of Mi− . Indeed, γi k → 0 and βi k → 0 as k → +∞,
by virtue of (51), and λk → 0, μk → 0 by (59). Therefore, when k → ∞, for any (Xi , Yi )
and (X̃i , Ỹi ) in D̂, when k → ∞, the following limits holds true: (x, y) → (x+         +
                                                                                i , 0) = Mi
                             −      −
in (60) and (x̃, ỹ) → (0, yi ) = Mi in (61).
   Note that the map Q1k will be the map Q in the statement of the Rescaling Lemma.

   Next, we are going to derive formulas (see (64),(77)) for the maps Q−1
                                                                       i+1,k T1 Q̃i+1,k and
  −1     k                                                      ˆ
Q̃i+1,k T0 Qik for the original map f and the perturbed map f . As the composition:

     (Q−1                      −1                        −1                   −1
       N +1,k T1 Q̃N +1,k )(Q̃N +1,k T0 QN k ) ◦ · · · (Qi+1,k T1 Q̃i+1,k )(Q̃i+1,k T0 Qik ) ◦ · · · ◦
                                      k                                              k

     (Q−1               −1 k
       2,k T1 Q̃2,k )(Q̃2,k T0 Q1k )


equals to Q−1    ˆn
            1k ◦ f ◦ Q1k for n = N (ks + m̄), we will obtain formula (41) in this way
and, thus, prove the Rescaling Lemma.

6.4. Renormalized iterations of the unperturbed map

   We start with the map Q̃−1     k                     k
                           i+1,k T0 Qi , i.e., the map T0 in the rescaled coordinates.


Lemma 6.6. Take any L̂ > 0 and let D̂ be the disc {X 2 + Y 2 ≤ L̂2 } in R2 . For every
suﬃciently large k there exist two real functions ξˆik , η̂ik on D̂, which vanish at zero and
satisfy for every ρ ≥ 1:

                                     ξ˜ik , η̃ik C ρ = o(1)k→+∞ ,                                      (63)

such that for every (Xi , Yi ) ∈ D̂ the points T0j Qik (Xi , Yi ) lie in U0 for all j = 1, . . . k,
and (X̃i+1 , Ỹi+1 ) = Q̃−1     k
                         i+1,k T0 Qik is given by


                                      X̃i+1 = Xi + ξ˜ik (Xi , Yi ),
                                                                                                         (64)
                                      Ỹi+1 = Yi + η̃ik (Xi , Yi ).

Proof. We will use the notation (xi , yi ) = Qik (Xi , Yi ) and (x̃i+1 , ỹi+1 ) = Q̃i+1,k (Xi+1 ,
Yi+1 ) = T0k (xi , yi ). By (50), (60) and (61), the ﬁrst k iterations of (xi , yi ) by T0 lie in U0
if and only if:
1282             P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288

      ⎧
      ⎪
      ⎨                x̃i+1 = λk xi + ξk (xi , ỹi+1 ),      yi = λk ỹi+1 + ηk (xi , ỹi+1 ),
                                                                         −
                           xi = x+i + bi Ri−1 μk Xi ,         yi = λk (yi+1 + γi k + Ri μk Yi ),         (65)
      ⎪
      ⎩ x̃        k +                                                   −
           i+1 = λ (xi + βi+1 k + bi Ri−1 μk X̃i+1 ),         ỹi+1 = yi+1 + Ri μk Ỹi+1 .

Thus,

                                                                                 −
 λk (βi+1 k + bi Ri−1 μk X̃i+1 ) = λk bi Ri−1 μk Xi + ξk (x+i + bi Ri−1 μk Xi , yi+1 + Ri μk Ỹi+1 ),
                                                                    −
 λk (γi k + Ri μk Yi ) = λk Ri μk Ỹi+1 + ηk (x+
                                               i + bi Ri−1 μk Xi , yi+1 + Ri μk Ỹi+1 ).

                                                                                                         (66)

Using the deﬁnition of βi+1 k and γi k , given in (62), we can see from formula (66) that
the zero value of (Xi , Yi ) corresponds to the zero value of (X̃i+1 , Ỹi+1 ). So, we can rewrite
(66) as

                                                                              
       μk X̃i+1 = μk Xi + ξik (μk Xi , μk Ỹi+1 ),         μk Yi = μk Ỹi+1 + ηik (μk Xi , μk Ỹi+1 ),

                                                          
where, as follows from (51) and (59), the functions ξik , ηik uniformly tend to zero in the
C ∞ -topology as k → +∞; moreover, they vanish when (Xi , Ỹi+1 ) = 0. So, we have that

                                                                         
                    X̃i+1 = Xi + ξ˜ik (Xi , Ỹi+1 ),       Yi = Ỹi+1 + η̃ik (Xi , Ỹi+1 ),              (67)

where the functions ξ̃ik     
                               (·) = μ−1    ˜                          −1             ∞
                                         k ξik (μk ·) and η̃ik (·) = μk η̃ik (μk ·) are C -small, and
these functions vanish at zero. By the implicit function theorem, the second equation of
(67) deﬁnes Ỹi+1 as a vanishing at zero function of (Xi , Yi ) which is uniformly smooth.
Therefore, formula (67) gives us the result of the lemma (i.e., relations (63) and (64))
                                                                    
with ξ˜ik (Xi , Yi ) := ξ˜ik (Xi , Ỹi+1 ) and η̃ik (Xi , Yi ) := −η̃ik (Xi , Ỹi+1 ). 2

  As the next step, we consider the map Q−1
                                         i+1,k T1 Q̃i+1,k (the map T1 in the rescaled
coordinates) for the unperturbed map f .

Lemma 6.7. There are two real functions φ̃1ik , φ̃2ik on the disc D̂ := {X̃ 2 + Ỹ 2 ≤ L̂2 }
satisfying:

                                    C∞                   C∞
                               φ̃1ik −→0     and    φ̃2ik −→0     as k → ∞,                              (68)

such that for every (X̃i+1 , Ỹi+1 ) ∈ D̂ sent to (Xi+1 , Yi+1 ) by Q−1
                                                                     i+1,k T1 Q̃i+1,k we have


Xi+1 = Ỹi+1 + φ̃1ik (X̃i+1 , Ỹi+1 ),   Yi+1 = Cik μ−1k + Ai Ỹi+1 − X̃i+1 + φ̃2ik (X̃i+1 , Ỹi+1 ),
(69)
                                                       −
where the constants8 Cik = [ci+1 (x+   i + βi+1 k ) − yi+2 − γi+1 k ]/Ri+1 and Ai = di+1 (xi +
                                                                                                +

βi+1,k )Ri /Ri+1 are uniformly bounded for all k.

 8
     See (54) and (60) for the deﬁnition of the coeﬃcients in these formulas.
                P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288                      1283



Proof. By deﬁnition, Qi+1,k (Xi+1 , Yi+1 ) = T1 Q̃i+1,k (X̃i+1 , Ỹi+1 ). Let (xi+1 , yi+1 ) :=
Qi+1,k (Xi+1 , Yi+1 ) and (x̃i+1 , ỹi+1 ) = Q̃i+1,k (Xi+1 , Yi+1 ). By (54), (60), and (61)
⎧
                                                −                               −
⎪
⎪               xi+1 = x+ i+1 + bi+1 (ỹi+1 − yi+1 ) + ϕ1 i+1 (x̃i+1 , ỹi+1 − yi+1 ),
⎪
⎨                                                 −                               −
             yi+1 = x̃i+1 (ci+1 + di+1 (ỹi+1 − yi+1 ) + ϕ2 i+1 (x̃i+1 , ỹi+1 − yi+1  )),
                                                                  −
⎪
⎪
                         +                                   k
                xi+1 = xi+1 + bi+1 Ri μk Xi+1 , yi+1 = λ (yi+2 + γi+1 k + Ri+1 μk Yi+1 ) ,
⎪
⎩ x̃         k +                                            −
     i+1 = λ  (x i + βi+1 k + bi Ri−1 μk X̃i+1 ), ỹi+1 = yi+1 + Ri μk Ỹi+1 .


We replace xi+1 and yi+1 in the ﬁrst and second lines by their expressions from the third
line, and then eliminate the term x+
                                   i+1 which now appears on both sides of the ﬁrst line.
This gives us
⎧
⎪                                                  −                                −
⎨                 bi+1 Ri μk Xi+1 = bi+1 (ỹi+1 − yi+1 ) + ϕ1 i+1 (x̃i+1 , ỹi+1 − yi+1 ),
         −                                                            −                                −
    λk (yi+2 + γi+1 k + Ri+1 μk Yi+1 ) = x̃i+1 (ci+1 + di+1 (ỹi+1 − yi+1 ) + ϕ2 i+1 (x̃i+1 , ỹi+1 − yi+1 )),
⎪
⎩                                                                    −
                           i + βi+1 k + bi Ri−1 μk X̃i+1 ), ỹi+1 − yi+1 = Ri μk Ỹi+1 .
              x̃i+1 = λk (x+

                                                                  −
We can now isolate the terms Xi+1 and Yi+1 , and replace ỹi+1 − yi+1 by its expression
Ri μk Ỹi+1 from the last line:
    ⎧
    ⎪
    ⎨                      Xi+1 = Ỹi+1 + bi+11Ri μk ϕ1 i+1 (x̃i+1 , Ri μk Ỹi+1 ),
                   −
                  yi+2 +γi+1 k       x̃i+1
    ⎪ Yi+1 = −                  + λk R        (ci+1 + di+1 Ri μk Ỹi+1 + ϕ2 i+1 (x̃i+1 , Ri μk Ỹi+1 )),
    ⎩               Ri+1 μk            i+1 μk
                                         k +
                              x̃i+1 = λ (xi + βi+1 k + bi Ri−1 μk X̃i+1 ) .

  Replacing x̃i+1 in the ﬁrst and second line by the right-hand side of the third line, we
obtain

               Xi+1 = Ỹi+1 + φ̃1ik (X̃i+1 , Ỹi+1 ),
                                               ci+1 bi Ri−1                                              (70)
               Yi+1 = Cik μ−1
                           k + Ai Ỹi+1 +                   X̃i+1 + φ̃2ik (X̃i+1 , Ỹi+1 ) ,
                                                  Ri+1

where the coeﬃcients Cik and Ai are as deﬁned in the statement of the lemma, and

                                                          1
                            φ̃1ik (X̃i+1 , Ỹi+1 ) =           ϕ̃1ik (X̃i+1 , Ỹi+1 ),                   (71)
                                                       bi+1 Ri
                                          x+
                                           i + βi+1 k + bi Ri−1 μk X̃i+1
              lφ̃2ik (X̃i+1 , Ỹi+1 ) =                                  ϕ̃2ik (X̃i+1 , Ỹi+1 )
                                                      Ri+1
                                                                                                         (72)
                                            bi Ri−1 X̃i+1
                                          +               di+1 Ri μk Ỹi+1 ,
                                                Ri+1

where

ϕ̃jik (X̃i+1 , Ỹi+1 ) = μ−1         k +
                          k ϕj i+1 (λ (xi + βi+1 k + bi Ri−1 μk X̃i+1 ), Ri μk Ỹi+1 ),           j = 1, 2.
                                                                                                         (73)
1284            P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



  Since the coeﬃcient ci+1Rbi+1
                             i Ri−1
                                    in the second equation of (70) equals to −1 by (58),
formula (70) gives us the lemma (cf. formula (69)), once we show that the functions φ̃jik
deﬁned by (71),(72) satisfy (68). To do this, we just need to notice that for every given
ρ, the C ρ -norms of the functions ϕ̃ijk deﬁned by (73) tend to zero as k → +∞. Indeed,
since the C ∞ -functions ϕj i+1 are independent of k, all their derivatives up to the order
                                                             ∂ ρ ϕ̃
ρ are uniformly bounded. Therefore, the derivatives (∂ X̃ )ρ−σjik   (∂ Ỹ )σ
                                                                             are estimated as
                                                               i+1       i+1

O(λ(ρ−σ)k μσ−1
            k   ). Hence, by (59), all the derivatives of order 2 and higher tend to zero
as k → +∞, as well as the ﬁrst derivative with respect to X̃i+1 . From (56)-(59), we also
have that ϕ̃jik = o(1)k→+∞ and ∂Ỹi+1 ϕ̃jik = o(1)k→+∞ , and the required C ∞ -smallness
of the functions ϕ̃ijk follows. 2

6.5. Construction of the perturbation g

   The perturbation we will now add to the map f does not change the map T0 (because
the perturbed map fˆ equals to g ◦ f where g will be supported in U+ which does not
intersect f (U0 ), so the diﬀerence fˆ−f is supported outside of U0 ). Therefore, Lemma 6.6
and its formula (64) for Q̃−1        k
                              i+1,k T0 Qik remains the same when f is replaced by the per-
turbed map fˆ. The map T1 will be aﬀected by the perturbation, hence Lemma 6.7 and
its formula (69) for the map Q−1   i+1,k T1 Q̃i+1,k will be modiﬁed. In order to construct the
perturbation map g, we take the functions ψ1 , . . . , ψN from the statement of the lemma
and deﬁne

                                                     Ai Ri+1
                     ψ̂i+1 : x → − λk Cik Ri+1 − λk          (x − x+
                                                                    i+1 )
                                                     bi+1 Ri                                   (74)
                                 + λk μk Ri+1 ψi (μ−1
                                                   k (x − xi+1 )/(bi+1 Ri )),
                                                             +



where the constants Cik , Ai are the same as in (69). As condition (59) implies that
|λ|k = o(μrk ), we have

                              ψ̂i+1 C r = o(μk ) → 0 as k → +∞.

  Recall that we use the notation (x, y) for the non-rescaled coordinates near the set
{Mi+ ; 1 ≤ i ≤ N } = {(x+
                        i , 0); 1 ≤ i ≤ N } ⊂ Wloc (O). Take ε > 0 and deﬁne neighbor-
                                                u
                
hoods Vi and Vi ⊂ Vi of the homoclinic points Mi+ :

                                     i , ε + xi ] × [−ε, ε]
       Vi := [−ε, ε]2 + Mi+ = [−ε + x+        +
                                                                 Vi := [−ε/2, ε/2]2 + Mi+ .

We assume that ε is small enough, so the discs Vi all lie in U+ and are mutually disjoint.
Denote V  = i Vi and V = i Vi , so V  ⊂ V . We choose k large enough, so Qik (D̂) ⊂ Vi ,
where D̂, the domain of the rescaling coordinates, is the disc from the formulation of
Lemmas 6.6 and 6.7. Below we deﬁne the perturbation map g such that the support of
g − id lies in V .
              P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288             1285



   Let Ψ ∈ C ∞ (i [−ε + x+          +
                            i , ε + xi ], R) be such that its derivative DΨ, in restriction to
[−ε + xi , ε + xi ], satisﬁes DΨ = ψ̂i . Let ρ ∈ C ∞ (R, [0, 1]) be the bump function equal
        +       +

to 1 identically in V  and equal to 0 identically outside of V . Let the perturbation map
g be equal to the time-1 map for the diﬀerential equation

               ẋ = −Ψ(x)∂y ρ(x, y),         ẏ = DΨ(x)ρ(x, y) + Ψ(x)∂x ρ(x, y).

This is a Hamiltonian system in R2 (with the Hamiltonian −Ψ(x)ρ(x, y)), so g is a
symplectic diﬀeomorphism. Since ψ̂i C r → 0 as k → +∞, it follows that g − idC r
can be made smaller than any given constant δ if k is taken suﬃciently large. Note also
that the support of g − id lies in V ⊂ U+ . All this is in agreement with the statement of
Rescaling Lemma.
  By construction, the restriction of g to Vi is given by

                                 g|Vi : (x, y) → (x, y + ψ̂i (x)).                          (75)

Plugging this into (54), we ﬁnd that for the perturbed map fˆ = g ◦ f the transition map
                                              −
T1 = fˆm = g ◦ f m from a neighborhood of Mi+1                            +
                                                  to a neighborhood of Mi+1   is given by

                                      −                         −
              x = x+i+1 + bi+1 (ỹ − yi+1 ) + ϕ1 i+1 (x̃, ỹ − yi+1 ),
                                                    −                          −              (76)
              y = ψ̂i+1 (x) + x̃(ci+1 + di+1 (ỹ − yi+1  ) + ϕ2 i+1 (x̃, ỹ − yi+1 )),

                                                                     −
with the same functions (ϕ1 i+1 , ϕ2 i+1 ) and coeﬃcients x+  i+1 , yi+1 , bi+1 , ci+1 , di+1 as
for the unperturbed map f , and with the single additional term ψ̂i+1(x) in the second
equation. Therefore, because the rescaling map Qi+1,k is aﬃne, the only correction to
the map Q−1i+1,k T1 Q̃i+1,k due to this perturbation will be the additional term


DQ−1
  i+1,k ◦ (0, ψ̂i+1 ) ◦ Qi+1,k (Xi+1 , Yi+1 ) = (0, λ
                                                      −k −1 −1
                                                        μk Ri+1 ψ̂i+1 (x+
                                                                        i+1 + bi+1 Ri μk Xi+1 ))


in the right-hand side of the respective equations in (69) (we use here the rescaling
formula (60) with i replaced by i + 1; DQ denotes the linear part of the aﬃne map Q).
By (74), this formula can be rewritten as

    DQ−1                                                  −1
      i+1,k ◦ (0, ψ̂i+1 ) ◦ Qi+1,k (Xi+1 , Yi+1 ) = (0, −μk Cik − Ai Xi+1 + ψi (Xi+1 )),


so the equation (69) for the map Q−1
                                  i+1,k T1 Q̃i+1,k changes to


           Xi+1 = Ỹi+1 + φ̃1ik (X̃i+1 , Ỹi+1 ),
                                                                                              (77)
           Yi+1 = −X̃i+1 + ψi (Xi+1 ) + φ̃2ik (X̃i+1 , Ỹi+1 ) − Ai φ̃1ik (X̃i+1 , Ỹi+1 ).

   By this formula and formula (64) from Lemma 6.6, the map T1 T0k = fˆm̄+sk = g◦f m̄+sk
from a small neighborhood of Mi+ to a small neighborhood of Mi+1   +
                                                                       is written, in the
rescaled coordinates, as
1286           P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



          Xi+1 = Yi + φ1ik (Xi , Yi ),        Yi+1 = −Xi + ψi (Xi+1 ) + φ2ik (Xi , Yi ),         (78)

where

 φ1ik = η̂ik + φ̃1ik ◦(id+(ξik , ηik )),     φ2ik = −ξˆik +(φ̃2ik −Ai φ̃1ik )◦(id+(ξik , ηik )). (79)

By (63),(68), the functions φ1ik , φ2ik tend to zero uniformly in C ∞ on any compact as
k → +∞. Importantly, the functions (φ1ik , φ2ik )i do not depend on the choice of the
perturbation functions (ψi )i .
   Formula (78), in fact, completes the proof of the Rescaling Lemma. Indeed, it can be
rewritten as

                                 (Xi+1 , Yi+1 ) = Hψi ◦ Φi (Xi , Yi ),

where

                      Φi (Xi , Yi ) = (Xi − φ2ik (Xi , Yi ), Yi + φik (Xi , Yi )).

Thus, the map (T1 T0k )N from a small neighborhood of M1+ takes indeed the required
form (41) in the coordinates (X, Y ) = Q−1    1k (x, y). In order to prove relation (44) (with
Q = Q1k and n = N (ks + m̄)), note that the functions ψi are uniformly bounded by the
constant L, and the functions φjik are small, so for any given constant Li the image of
the disc {Xi2 +Yi2 ≤ L2i } by the map (78) lies inside the disc {Xi+1  2      2
                                                                          +Yi+1  ≤ L2i+1 } where
Li+1 = Li +L +1. Therefore, the images of the unit disc D by the ﬁrst N iterations of (78)
lie in the disc D̂ from Lemmas 6.6 and 6.7 if its radius L̂ satisﬁes L̂ > N (L + 1). In other
words, fˆi(ks+m̄) ◦Q1k (D) ⊂ Qi+1,k (D̂) ⊂ Vi+1 ⊂ U0 for all i = 0, . . . , N −1. Since the discs
Vi are mutually disjoint, we have that fˆi(ks+m̄) ◦Q1k (D) ∩Q1k (D) for all i = 0, . . . , N −1.
The images fˆm ◦ Q1k (D) with m = i(ks + m̄) cannot intersect Q1k (D) too, because they
lie outside of U+ by construction. Indeed, by Lemma 6.6, fˆls Qik (D̂) = T0l Qik (D̂) ⊂
U0 ∩ T0 U0 for l = 1, . . . , k – this implies that fˆj Qik (D̂) ∩ U+ = ∅ for 1 ≤ j ≤ ks (see
(53)), and fˆks Qik (D̂) ⊂ U− – this implies that fˆks+j Qik (D̂) ∩U+ = ∅ for j = 1, . . . , m −1
(see (52)). Thus, relation (44) is fulﬁlled for all m = 1, . . . , N (ks + m̄) − 1, as required.

References

 [1] D.V. Anosov, Geodesic ﬂows on closed Riemannian manifolds of negative curvature, Tr. Mat. Inst.
     Steklova 90 (1967) 209.
 [2] D.V. Anosov, A.B. Katok, New examples in smooth ergodic theory. Ergodic diﬀeomorphisms, Tr.
     Mosk. Mat. Obŝ. 23 (1970) 3–36.
 [3] N. Aoki, The set of Axiom A diﬀeomorphisms with no cycles, Bol. Soc. Bras. Mat. 23 (1–2) (1992)
     21–65.
 [4] M.-C. Arnaud, P. Berger, The non-hyperbolicity of irrational invariant curves for twist maps and
     all that follows, Rev. Mat. Iberoam. 32 (4) (2016) 1295–1310.
 [5] A. Arroyo, E. Pujals, C k -robust transitivity for surfaces with boundary, arXiv preprint, arXiv:
     0904.2561, 2009.
               P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288                  1287



 [6] M. Asaoka, K. Irie, A C ∞ closing lemma for Hamiltonian diﬀeomorphisms of closed surfaces, Geom.
     Funct. Anal. 26 (5) (2016) 1245–1254.
 [7] A. Avila, On the regularization of conservative maps, Acta Math. 205 (1) (2010) 5–18.
 [8] M. Benedicks, L. Carleson, The dynamics of the Hénon map, Ann. Math. 133 (1991) 73–169.
 [9] P. Berger, Abundance of non-uniformly hyperbolic Hénon like endomorphisms, Astérisque 410
     (2019) 53–177.
[10] P. Berger, P. Carrasco, Non-uniformly hyperbolic diﬀeomorphisms derived from the standard map,
     Comm. Math. Phys. 329 (1) (2014) 239–262.
[11] P. Berger, R. Dujardin, On stability and hyperbolicity for polynomial automorphisms of C2 , Ann.
     Sci. Éc. Norm. Supér. 4 (2017).
[12] P. Berger, J.-C. Yoccoz, Strong regularity, Astérisque 410 (2019) 1–14.
[13] G.D. Birkhoﬀ, Surface transformations and their dynamical applications, Acta Math. 43 (1) (1922)
     1–119.
[14] A. Blumenthal, J. Xue, L.S. Young, Lyapunov exponents for random perturbations of some area-
     preserving maps including the standard map, Ann. of Math. 185 (2017) 285–310.
[15] J. Bochi, Genericity of zero Lyapunov exponents, Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems 22 (6) (2002)
     1667–1696.
[16] C. Bonatti, L. Diaz, On maximal transitive sets of generic diﬀeomorphisms, Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes
     Études Sci. 96 (2002) 171–197.
[17] M. Chaperon, Quelques questions de géométrie symplectique (d’après, entre autres, Poincaré,
     Arnold, Conley et Zehnder), in: Bourbaki Seminar, in: Astérisque, vol. 105, Soc. Math. France,
     Paris, 1983, pp. 231–249.
[18] B.V. Chirikov, A universal instability of many-dimensional oscillator systems, Phys. Rep. 52 (5)
     (1979) 264–379.
[19] B. Dacorogna, J. Moser, On a partial diﬀerential equation involving the Jacobian determinant, Ann.
     Inst. H. Poincaré Anal. Non Linéaire 7 (1) (1990) 1–26.
[20] P. Duarte, Plenty of elliptic islands for the standard family of area preserving maps, Ann. Inst. H.
     Poincaré Anal. Non Linéaire 11 (4) (1994) 359–409.
[21] P. Duarte, Abundance of elliptic isles at conservative bifurcations, Dyn. Stab. Syst. 14 (4) (1999)
     339–356.
[22] P. Duarte, Elliptic isles in families of area-preserving maps, Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems 28 (6)
     (2008) 1781–1813.
[23] R. Dujardin, M. Lyubich, Stability and bifurcations for dissipative polynomial automorphisms of
     C2 , Invent. Math. 200 (2) (2015) 439–511.
[24] B. Fayad, Manuscript.
[25] A. Furman, On the multiplicative ergodic theorem for uniquely ergodic systems, Ann. Inst. Henri
     Poincaré Probab. Stat. 33 (6) (1997) 797–815.
[26] V. Gelfreich, V. Lazutkin, Splitting of separatrices: perturbation theory and exponential smallness,
     Uspekhi Mat. Nauk 56 (3(339)) (2001) 79–142.
[27] V. Gelfreich, D. Turaev, Universal dynamics in a neighborhood of a generic elliptic periodic point,
     Regul. Chaotic Dyn. 15 (2–3) (2010) 159–164.
[28] A. Giorgilli, V.F. Lazutkin, Some remarks on the problem of ergodicity of the standard map, Phys.
     Lett. A 272 (5–6) (2000) 359–367.
[29] S. Gonchenko, L. Shilnikov, D. Turaev, Homoclinic tangencies of arbitrarily high orders in conser-
     vative and dissipative two-dimensional maps, Nonlinearity 20 (2) (2007) 241–275.
[30] S.V. Gonchenko, L.P. Shilnikov, D.V. Turaev, On dynamical properties of multidimensional diﬀeo-
     morphisms from Newhouse regions. I, Nonlinearity 21 (5) (2008) 923–972.
[31] A. Gorodetski, On stochastic sea of the standard map, Comm. Math. Phys. 309 (1) (2012) 155–192.
[32] R.S. Hamilton, The inverse function theorem of Nash and Moser, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.)
     7 (1) (1982) 65–222.
[33] M. Herman, Some open problems in dynamical systems, in: Proceedings of the International
     Congress of Mathematicians, vol. II, Berlin, 1998, in: Number Extra, vol. II, 1998, pp. 797–808.
[34] M.V. Jakobson, Absolutely continuous invariant measures for one-parameter families of one-
     dimensional maps, Comm. Math. Phys. 81 (1) (1981) 39–88.
[35] A. Katok, Bernoulli diﬀeomorphisms on surfaces, Ann. of Math. (2) 110 (3) (1979) 529–547.
[36] A. Katok, Lyapunov exponents, entropy and periodic orbits for diﬀeomorphisms, Publ. Math. Inst.
     Hautes Études Sci. (51) (1980) 137–173.
[37] A.N. Kolmogorov, Théorie générale des systèmes dynamiques et mécanique classique, in: Proceed-
     ings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, Amsterdam, 1954, vol. 1, 1957, pp. 315–333.
1288           P. Berger, D. Turaev / Advances in Mathematics 349 (2019) 1234–1288



[38] P. Le Calvez, Propriétés dynamiques des régions d’instabilité, Ann. Sci. Éc. Norm. Supér. (4) 20 (3)
     (1987) 443–464.
[39] C. Liverani, Birth of an elliptic island in a chaotic sea, Math. Phys. Electron. J. 10 (2004), Paper
     1, 13.
[40] M. Lyubich, Investigation of the stability of the dynamics of rational functions, Teor. Funkc. Funkc.
     Anal. Ih Prilož. (42) (1984) 72–91, Translated in Selecta Math. Soviet. 9 (1) (1990) 69–90.
[41] R. Mañé, An ergodic closing lemma, Ann. of Math. (2) 116 (3) (1982) 503–540.
[42] R. Mañé, P. Sad, D. Sullivan, On the dynamics of rational maps, Ann. Sci. Éc. Norm. Supér. (4)
     16 (2) (1983) 193–217.
[43] J.N. Mather, Variational construction of orbits of twist diﬀeomorphisms, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 4 (2)
     (1991) 207–263.
[44] J.D. Meiss, Transient measures in the standard map, Phys. D 74 (3–4) (1994) 254–267.
[45] L. Mora, N. Romero, Persistence of homoclinic tangencies for area-preserving maps, Ann. Fac. Sci.
     Toulouse Math. (6) 6 (4) (1997) 711–725.
[46] J. Moser, On a theorem of Anosov, J. Diﬀerential Equations 5 (1969) 411–440.
[47] S. Newhouse, D. Ruelle, F. Takens, Occurrence of strange Axiom A attractors near quasiperiodic
     ﬂows on T m , m ≥ 3, Comm. Math. Phys. 64 (1) (1978/1979) 35–40.
[48] S.E. Newhouse, Nondensity of axiom A(a) on S 2 , in: Global Analysis, Proc. Sympos. Pure Math.,
     Vol. XIV, Berkeley, Calif., 1968, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1970, pp. 191–202.
[49] S.E. Newhouse, Quasi-elliptic periodic points in conservative dynamical systems, Amer. J. Math.
     99 (5) (1977) 1061–1087.
[50] S.E. Newhouse, The abundance of wild hyperbolic sets and nonsmooth stable sets for diﬀeomor-
     phisms, Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. (50) (1979) 101–151.
[51] J. Palis, J.-C. Yoccoz, Non-uniformly hyperbolic horseshoes arising from bifurcations of Poincaré
     heteroclinic cycles, Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. (110) (2009) 1–217.
[52] Y. Pesin, Characteristic Lyapunov exponents, and smooth ergodic theory, Russian Math. Surveys
     32 (4) (1977) 55–114.
[53] H. Poincaré, Les Méthodes Nouvelles de la Mécanique Céleste. Tome III. Les Grands Classiques
     Gauthier-Villars, Librairie Scientiﬁque et Technique Albert Blanchard, Paris, 1987, Reprint of the
     1899 original.
[54] F. Przytycki, Examples of conservative diﬀeomorphisms of the two-dimensional torus with coexis-
     tence of elliptic and stochastic behaviour, Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems 2 (3–4) (1983) 439–463,
     1982.
[55] D. Ruelle, F. Takens, On the nature of turbulence, Comm. Math. Phys. 20 (1971) 167–192.
[56] G. Sinaı, Topics in Ergodic Theory, Princeton Mathematical Series, vol. 44, Princeton University
     Press, Princeton, NJ, 1994.
[57] D. Turaev, Polynomial approximations of symplectic dynamics and richness of chaos in non-
     hyperbolic area-preserving maps, Nonlinearity 16 (1) (2003) 123–135.
[58] D. Turaev, Richness of chaos in the absolute Newhouse domain, in: Proceedings of the International
     Congress of Mathematicians, vol. III, Hindustan Book Agency, New Delhi, 2010, pp. 1804–1815.
[59] D. Turaev, Maps close to identity and universal maps in the Newhouse domain, Comm. Math. Phys.
     335 (3) (2015) 1235–1277.
[60] S. Ushiki, Sur les liasons-cols des systèmes dynamiques analytiques, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. A-B
     291 (7) (1980) A447–A449.
[61] A. Weinstein, Symplectic manifolds and their Lagrangian submanifolds, Adv. Math. 6 (1971)
     329–346.
[62] H. Whitney, Analytic extensions of diﬀerentiable functions deﬁned in closed sets, Trans. Amer.
     Math. Soc. 36 (1) (1934) 63–89.
[63] J.-C. Yoccoz, Centralisateurs et conjugaison diﬀérentiable des diﬀéomorphismes du cercle,
     Astérisque (231) (1995) 89–242, Petits diviseurs en dimension 1.
[64] E. Zehnder, Note on smoothing symplectic and volume-preserving diﬀeomorphisms, Lecture Notes
     in Math. 597 (1977) 828–854.
