             Closed Aspherical Manifolds with Center
                      (to Frank Raymond, with friendship and admiration)


                                  Sylvain Cappell∗
                       Courant Institute, New York University

                                    Shmuel Weinberger†
                                   University of Chicago

                                   Min Yan‡
                 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
                                        May 11, 2012


                                            Abstract
            We show that in all dimensions > 7 there are closed aspherical manifolds whose
        fundamental groups have nontrivial center but do not possess any topological circle
        actions. This disproves a conjectured converse (proposed by Conner and Raymond)
        to a classical theorem of Borel.


1       Introduction
Aspherical manifolds are manifolds with contractible universal cover. Such manifolds play
significant roles in mathematics. Their homotopy types are determined by the fundamen-
tal groups. Important rigidity conjectures state more strongly that the geometry of such
spaces is specified by their fundamental group. For example, the Borel conjecture states
that the homeomorphism type of a closed aspherical manifold is determined by the fun-
damental group. Progress on such rigidity conjectures has long been a focus of research
efforts.
    Here we consider another kind of conjectured rigidity of aspherical manifolds, about
the existence of effective actions of positive dimensional compact Lie groups. A theorem
of Borel [5] asserts that, if the fundamental group of a closed aspherical manifold is
centerless, then there is no such action, and the finite groups that act effectively must
act as outer automorphisms of the fundamental group. In fact, Borel’s analysis shows
    ∗
      Research was partially supported by a DARPA grant
    †
      Research was partially supported by an NSF grant
    ‡
      Research was supported by Hong Kong Research Grant Council General Research Fund 604408


                                                1
that for a circle action on a closed aspherical manifold, the orbit of any point is central
in the fundamental group, and the inclusion map is an injection on fundamental group.
Then Conner and Raymond proved in [15] that only toral groups, among the connected
Lie groups, can act effectively on closed aspherical manifolds, and the centers of their
fundamental groups must contain an injective image of the fundamental group of the
torus. They further raised the question [15, page 229] whether a converse to Borel’s
theorem holds: If the fundamental group of a closed aspherical manifold has nontrivial
center, then the manifold has a circle action, such that the orbit circle is a nontrivial
central element of the fundamental group. This conjecture was stated again recently in
[33]. By the works of [11, 30], the conjecture is true in dimension 3.
    In the decades since this speculation arose, many of the conjectures about aspherical
manifolds from that period were disproved. Essentially, the only remaining one is the
Borel conjecture that asserts a form of topological rigidity for aspherical manifolds; see
[3, 25] for some of the more recent positive results on these problems.
    In a sense, the Conner-Raymond conjecture can be regarded as a consequence of a
very strong form of the Borel conjecture. In fact, any central element of the fundamental
group of an aspherical manifold can be realized by a map of the circle into the space of
self homotopy equivalences. What it asked for is that this circle family of self homotopy
equivalences be realized by a circle action. This turns out to be too much, and the
conjecture is false.
    The counterexamples to most of the old conjectures stem from essentially two different
constructions of aspherical manifolds. The first was the “reflection group trick” of Michael
Davis [19] which yielded the first aspherical manifolds whose universal covers are not
Euclidean spaces. Also, it was used to construct aspherical manifolds which have no
differentiable structure, and even ones which are not triangulable. Moreover, this method
produced examples whose fundamental groups are not residually finite, and even ones
which have unsolvable word problem. See [20] for a survey and references.
    The second construction was Gromov’s idea of hyperbolization [31], developed in [12,
21, 22, 35]. It implies that aspherical manifolds exist in abundance. For instance, any
compact PL manifold is the image of an aspherical manifold by a degree one tangential
map, and any cobordism class can be represented by an aspherical manifold.
    In both constructions, the fundamental groups of the aspherical manifolds are center-
less. Interestingly, Lee and Raymond [34] showed that if the fundamental group of an
aspherical manifold has nontrivial center, or more generally contains a nontrivial abelian
normal subgroup, then the universal cover is homeomorphic to an Euclidean space. This
is rather uncommon in the setting of Davis constructions.
    In this note, motivated by the work of Conner and Raymond, we will give some coun-
terexamples for which the fundamental group has nontrivial center. Ultimately the result
is a combination of codimension one splitting obstructions and related surgery methods
[7, 8, 9], a construction of non-arithmetic hyperbolic manifolds [32], a version of hyper-
bolization [22], a construction for the Nielson realization problem [1], the characterization
of homologically injective toral actions [16], and homology manifolds [6] (as the theory in
[16] does not guarantee that the reduction to a Nielsen type problem will necessarily be
on a manifold). We remark that some of these ingredients had been combined in [1] but
here must be modified to deal with homology manifolds; as a technical aside, we point
out, following a suggestion of James Davis, how to use [13] to simplify [1].

                                             2
   To get examples in all sufficiently large dimensions, it is necessary to introduce some of
the first steps of a theory of topological G-surgery up to “pseudoequivalence”. See [36] for
an influential early treatment in the smooth category. There are a number of interesting
new issues in the topological category, and this theory will have further applications to
transformation groups, but here we develop just enough for the present applications.
Theorem. In dimension 6 and all dimensions ≥ 8, there are closed aspherical manifolds
with fundamental groups each having Z as center, yet do not possess nontrivial topological
circle actions.
    We believe there are examples in all dimensions ≥ 5 but can only speculate about
dimension 4.
    It is worth noting that counterexamples to the differentiable analogue, just as for the
Borel conjecture, are easy consequences of the existence of exotic spheres: for an exotic
sphere Σn , the connected sum, T n #Σn does not have any effective smooth circle action.
    The examples of the theorem are mapping tori of homeomorphisms of closed, aspherical
manifolds, h : V → V , such that even though h2 = h ◦ h is homotopic to the identity,
h is not homotopic to an involution. To get from our initial examples to ones in all
dimensions ≥ 8, we take products of our initial examples with some hyperbolic manifolds.
The manifolds V and the homotopy classes of h in the initial examples were constructed
for a different application in [1], although the fact that the homotopy classes contain
homeomorphisms was not noted in that paper. The infinite cyclic center is generated by
the square of the stable letter of the HNN-extension describing the fundamental group of
the mapping torus.
Aknowledgement We would like to express our gratitude to Frank Raymond, who
provided valuable comments and suggestions to an earlier draft of the paper.


2    Construction
We divide the proof into several small steps, some of which are already known to experts
but included for the sake of readability.

Step 1. Equivariant non-rigidity of Z2 -tori.

    Borel conjectured that closed aspherical manifolds are topologically rigid. The equiv-
ariant version of this conjecture asserts that closed aspherical manifolds with suitable
finite or compact group actions are also rigid. However, the equivariant Borel conjecture
is false. The simplest counterexamples are involutions on tori, which we will use in our
construction. Very recently, Connolly, Davis and Kahn [14] gave a very detailed and
complete analysis of the equivariant structure set of such involutions.
    For closed manifolds in dim ≥ 5, or dim = 4 and nice fundamental group, the surgery
exact sequence
                    → Ln+1 (π, ω) → S(M ) → Hn (M ; L) → Ln (π, ω)
is an exact sequence of abelian groups that computes the s-cobordism class S(M ) of
homology manifolds simple homotopy equivalent to M . The surgery obstruction groups
Ln are defined in [44] and depend on the dimension n, the fundamental group π, and the

                                             3
orientation character ω : π → {±1}. The homology Hn is the generalized homology theory
associated to the (simply connected) surgery spectrum L. For noncompact manifolds, the
exact sequence (where the homology is the ordinary one) computes the structures that
have compact support, i.e., for which the homotopy equivalences are homeomorphisms (or
CE-maps) outside of some compact subsets. If the surgery obstruction group is replaced
by a relative surgery obstruction group that takes into account the fundamental group at
infinity, and the homology is the locally finite homology, then the exact sequence computes
the proper structures.
    We will not be concerned with the usual s, h decorations in the surgery exact sequence
which reflect various algebraic K-theoretic refinements, as all the discrete groups we are
considering will have vanishing Whitehead and reduced projective class groups, so that
there is no difference among these decorations.
    Let T be the torus T n with standard involution, such that the fixed set has dimension
either 0 or 1. In the surgery exact sequence, we take M to be (a compactification of)
the complement of the fixed point set of T . Thus π is the orbifold fundamental group of
the involution, and is a semidirect product Zn o Z2 according to the representation of Z2
on H1 (T ). This representation is either the multiplication by −1 (when the fixed set is
discrete) or has a one dimensional trivial summand (when the fixed set has dimension 1).
    The semidirect product π = Zn o Z2 has Zd+1 o Z2 ∼        = Zd × (Z2 ∗ Z2 ) as a direct
summand, where d is the dimension of the fixed set, and Z2 acts trivially on the Zd part
of Zd+1 . The surgery obstruction group of the direct summand is given as follows.

Theorem (Banagl and Ranicki [2], Connolly and Davis [13]). The surgery obstruction
group Lr (Z2 ∗Z2 , ω ⊕ω) is infinitely generated if and only if either ω is trivial and r = 2 or
3 mod 4, or ω nontrivial and r = 0 or 1 mod 4. Moreover, crossing with a circle produces
infinitely generated subgroups in Lr+1 (Z × (Z2 ∗ Z2 ), ω ⊕ ω) in the same cases.

     The case of ω trivial and r = 2 mod 4 was due to Cappell [7] and expressed there
as the geometric statement that there are infinitely many manifolds that are homotopy
equivalent to RP 4k+1 #RP 4k+1 , but are not the connected sums of two manifolds homotopy
equivalent to RP 4k+1 .
     The actual result in [13] is a calculation of the UNil groups of Cappell [8] that describe
the failure of reduced L-theory to be additive for free products (or more generally the
Mayer-Vietoris sequences associated to group actions on trees). They subsequently ana-
lyzed the complete obstruction to this additivity problem. The groups in the theorem are
infinitely generated exactly when the UNil groups are nontrivial. In case the fixed set is
discrete, Connolly, Davis and Kahn [14] further showed that S(M ) is a sum of such UNil
groups. Moreover, they also showed that S(M ) is the same as the isovariant structure set
S iso (T ) of exotic involutions on the torus that are isovariantly homotopic to the standard
involution. Combining these ingredients with Shaneson’s formula for surgery groups after
crossing with Z [42], we have a similar description when the fixed set has dimension 1.
     For the present purpose, all we need is that a nontrivial element of Ln+1 (Zd × (Z2 ∗
Z2 ), ω ⊕ ω) gives, via split injections Zd × (Z2 ∗ Z2 ) → π, an involution on the torus
that is homotopic to the standard involution but not isovariantly homeomorphic to it.
We denote the torus with this exotic involution by T 0 . It is important to note that the
exotic involution remains PL. By proper surgery, the exotic involutions do not become


                                               4
standard even when the fixed sets are deleted. Thus, there is no need for stratified surgery
techniques [46] for this part of the analysis.
   When is Ln+1 (Zd × (Z2 ∗ Z2 ), ω ⊕ ω) nontrivial, so that exotic involutions exist? If
d = 0 and n is even, then ω is trivial, and Ln+1 is nontrivial only when n + 1 = 2 or 3
mod 4. Therefore n = 2 mod 4. If d = 0 and n is odd, then ω is nontrivial, and Ln+1 is
nontrivial only when n + 1 = 0 or 1 mod 4. Therefore n = 3 mod 4.

Conclusion. For n ≥ 4, there are exotic involutions on T n with discrete fixed set if and
only if n = 2 or 3 mod 4. Similarly, there are exotic involutions on T n with 1-dimensional
fixed set if and only if n = 0 or 3 mod 4.

   Relying on [7], Block and Weinberger [1] made use of these elements, with a simpler
analysis in the d = 0 case.

Step 2. Construction of counterexamples to Nielsen realization problem.

    We largely follow [1], but make use of some more surgery to yield examples in all
dimensions. The new difficulties in verifying these examples will be dealt with in the next
step.
    The torus T with the standard involution is easily the boundary of a PL aspherical
manifold W with involution, such that the inclusion π1 T → π1 W is injective. We will
show that the same is true for the torus T 0 with exotic involution constructed in the first
step.
    The construction of T 0 shows that there is a normal cobordism Z between the standard
involution T and the exotic involution T 0 . Moreover, the cobordism is trivial on the fixed
part, the involution action is finite and PL, and it can be arranged so that the orbifold
fundamental group of Z is also π. Now we may apply the relative version [22] of Gromov
hyperbolization [12, 21], which starts from any simplicial complex and combines “simplices
of non-positively curved manifolds” to build a polyhedral space that closely resembles the
polyhedron [20, 21]. So we hyperbolize the quotient Z/Z2 relative to the two ends, and
get an aspherical Z2 -cobordism Z 0 between T and T 0 . Then W 0 = Z 0 ∪T W is a PL
aspherical manifold with involution, such that ∂W 0 = T 0 , and the inclusion π1 T 0 → π1 W 0
is injective.
    Although ∂W = T and ∂W 0 = T 0 are not equivariantly homeomorphic, the involutions
are homotopic. Any one such homotopy equivalence is homotopic to a homeomorphism.
Let V be obtained by glueing W and W 0 along this homeomorphism. Then V is a closed
aspherical manifold of dimension n + 1. The construction is somewhat reminiscent of the
construction in [32] of non-arithmetic lattices by glueing hyperbolic manifolds with totally
geodesic boundary together via isometries of their respective boundaries.
    Consider V as W ∪T T n × [0, 1] ∪T 0 W 0 . We have the standard involution on T n × 0
and the exotic involution on T n × 1. Since homotopic homeomorphisms of the torus are
always pseudoisotopic (see [44], for example), the involutions on both ends of the ribbon
T n ×[0, 1] can be extended to a (noninvolutive) homeomorphism of the interior. This gives
a homeomorphism h : V → V that satisfies h2 = id on W and W 0 but is not involutive
on V .
    Since h is involutive on W and W 0 , we have h2 ≃ id on V . However, it is shown in [1]
(for the examples coming from L6 , but the proof is no different for all of our examples)

                                             5
that no manifold homotopy equivalent to V has an involution inducing the same outer
automorphism as h∗ on the fundamental group. In particular, the outer automorphism
h∗ on the fundamental group of V gives a counterexample to the generalized Nielsen
realization problem. We will see in the next step that these remain counterxamples after
crossing with any closed hyperbolic manifold.
    The closed aspherical manifold with center in its fundamental group that we will
ultimately show does not have a circle action is the mapping torus T (h), which has
dimension n + 2. The dimensions are those ≥ 6 that are 6= 3 mod 4. To get examples at
all dimensions ≥ 8, we will further consider T (h) × H for a closed hyperbolic manifold H.
Note that if the exotic involution is concordant to the standard one, then the extension to
the interior of the ribbon can be kept involutive, so that T (h) would have a circle action
whose orbits would go through the section T n (generically) twice. Our aim is to show
that T (h) as constructed (and its extension T (h) × H) does not have any circle actions.

Step 3. Verification of counterexamples to Nielsen.

     The non-existence of circle actions on T (h)×H will be reduced to the following version
of the counterexample to Nielsen: No homology manifold homotopy equivalent to V × H
has an involution inducing the same outer automorphism on the fundamental group as
h∗ . This is a stronger version than the one proved in [1], which only dealt with topological
manifolds and did not consider the closed hyperbolic manifold factor.
     According to [6], the surgery theory for topological manifolds used in the argument in
[1] can be adopted for homology manifolds without change, except for perhaps an extra
Z, reflecting, in the normal invariants, Quinn’s obstruction to resolution of homology
manifolds [39]. In fact, this extra Z does not appear here, because a homology manifold
homotopy equivalent to V has a Poincaré embedded codimension 1 torus. Therefore, by an
argument similar to one in [4], the homology manifold must automatically be resolvable,
which disposes of this final Z.
     In some more detail, codimension one splitting gives a map from the surgery exact
sequence of V to the surgery exact sequence of the codimension one submanifold T n ⊂ V

                     S(V ) −−−→        Hn+1 (V ; L)       −−−→ Ln+1 (π1 V )
                                          
                                          
                      y                    y
                    S(T n ) −−−→ Hn (T n ; L) ⊗ Z[ 21 ]

The final Z is caught by Hn (T n ; L) ⊗ Z[ 12 ] but S(T n ) is trivial.
    Notice, though, that all that is used is the vanishing of the homomorphism S(T n ) →
Hn (T n ; L) ⊗ Z[ 12 ], i.e., the Novikov conjecture for the torus. Since the Novikov conjecture
is well-known for non-positively curved closed manifolds [26], this argument remains valid
after crossing with a closed hyperbolic manifold H.
    Having dealt with the issue of homology manifolds, the remaining obstacle for carrying
out the argument in [1] is that crossing with a hyperbolic manifold may raise the dimension
of the fixed sets, so that one does not have a good equivariant homotopy model for the
putative group action. In the situation of T (h) without crossing with H, the fixed set
is low enough dimensional that the local homotopy theory forces the fixed set to be a
manifold, and then more standard tools can be applied. When the dimension of the fixed

                                               6
set is higher, the fixed set need not even be ANRs, and have fairly uncontrolled homotopy
theory away from 2.
    Nevertheless, as we observe below, some part of the total surgery obstruction for
T (h) does apply a priori to our situation even after crossing with a positive dimensional
manifold. To do this, we will begin the development of a theory of surgery obstructions
to pseudoequivalence.

Definition. A pseudoequivalence f : X → Y between G-spaces is an equivariant map
which is a homotopy equivalence (upon ignoring the group action).

    Let EG be a contractible free G-space. The pseudoequivalence simply means that the
map X × EG → Y × EG is an equivariant homotopy equivalence. This is also equivalent
to that the Borel constructions (X × EG)/G → (Y × EG)/G are homotopy equivalent.
    In our situation, we have a Y that is an equivariant Poincaré object, and the manifold
solution of the Nielsen realization problem would be pseudoequivalent to Y . In [41],
pseudoequivalence invariance of (higher) signature operators is studied. Unfortunately,
the analysis there is not adequate for our situation that uses an obstruction at the prime
2 that does not appear to be an invariant of the any type of signature operator. We shall
not use a priori absolute invariants, but have to use relative invariants to capture our
obstruction.

Proposition. Suppose that f : N → Y is a degree one G-map from a manifold to an
equivariant Poincaré complex that is a pseudoequivalence on the singular sets of these
spaces, and that after crossing with EG, this map is covered by surgery bundle data.
Then it is possible to define a surgery obstruction associated to f that lies in Lpd (π1 ((Y ×
EG)/G)).

Proof. We observe that the usual definition of the surgery obstruction actually applies to
the chain complex of the mapping cylinder of f , once one verifies that it is chain equivalent
to a finite projective chain complex [40]. This is easy, since the map is clearly a G-
equivalence after crossing with any free G-space, so one can cross with a highly connected
free G-manifold (e.g. the universal cover of the boundary of a regular neighborhood of a
skeleton of BG embedded in Euclidean space), use the free structure on that map, and
then truncate at dim Y .
    This truncated chain complex is projective as shown by Wall [43]. In general, for
nonfree actions, one cannot improve this to a free chain complex as examples of [38] or
[45] show.

Remark 1. This proposition is in part motivated by an elegant paper of Dovermann [24],
where he observes that in a particular pseudoequivalence problem, the appropriate home
for bundle data is the Borel construction.

Remark 2. A variant of this proposition, without bundle data, can be formulated using
visible L-theory [47]. Even in this setting, it is necessary to work with maps that are
pseudoequivalences on the singular sets, because without that condition, there is no way
to define the relevant truncation.
    Because of Weiss’ fundamental result relating assembly maps in visible and quadratic
L-theories, the subsequent arguments can be adapted to the visible setting.

                                              7
Remark 3. Since the surgery obstruction that we have obtained lies in Lp , we cannot
always complete surgery when this obstruction vanishes. Its vanishing only assures that
the surgery can be completed after crossing with R. We hope to return to the geometry
of surgery up to pseudoequivalence in the topological category and its applications to
transformation groups in a future paper. For our current purpose, the previous proposition
defining the obstruction suffices.
    In light of the proposition, if a stratified Poincaré complex is pseudoequivalent to a
G-manifold, one sees that the top pure stratum, thought of as a pair, has a degree one
normal map. The surgery obstruction of this lies in Lpd (π1 ((Y × EG)/G)), and its image
in Lpd (π1 ((Y × EG)/G), π1 ((ΣY × EG)/G)) is trivial (ΣY denoting the singular set of Y ),
because one obtains a homotopy equivalence after glueing in the neighborhood of ΣN .
    In our situation, however, the UNil obstruction survives the removal of the singular
set. Similar to the argument in [1], this is seen by considering the boundary map in the
exact sequence of an amalgamated free product that calculates π1 V and then mapping
further to the pair (Z2 ∗ Z2 , Z2 t Z2 ).
    Now, if we cross with a hyperbolic manifold, then the Novikov conjecture with coeffi-
cients in the ring Z[π1 V o Z2 ] implies that our UNil obstruction still survives. The reason
is that the obstruction survives upon crossing with Rn , as an element in the bounded
L-theory over Rn [27]. Thus we can take the transfer to the universal cover Rn of the
hyperbolic manifold, followed by the inverse of the exponential map. Actually, this appli-
cation of bounded L-theory is behind the descent proofs of the Novikov conjecture with
coefficients; see [10, 28, 29], for examples.

Step 4. Double cover of nontrivial circle action on T (h).

    Since V is aspherical, its fundamental group is torsion free. As observed in [1], the
fundamental group is also centerless. This is because it is constructed via an amalgamated
free product along a subgroup containing no central elements. Indeed, the fundamental
group of a hyperbolized cobordism generally contains Z ∗ π1 ∂.
    The fundamental group of the mapping torus T (h) is the HNN-extension

                         π1 (T (h)) = π1 V oh∗ hti,   tat−1 = h∗ (a).

By h2 ≃ id, we know t2 is a central element of π1 (T (h)). The two fold cover of T (h)
corresponding to the subgroup π1 V × ht2 i is T (h2 ). Moreover, h2 ≃ id implies that
T (h2 ) ≃ V × S 1 .
    Suppose T (h) has a nontrivial circle action. Let

      G = {g : T (h2 ) → T (h2 ) : g covers the action of some circle element on T (h)}

be the group of covering actions. Then we have an exact sequence 1 → Z2 → G → S 1 .
    Since T (h) is a closed aspherical manifold, according to Borel the orbit of any point
gives an injective map π1 S 1 → π1 (T (h)), and the image of the map lies in the center of
π1 (T (h)).
    Let atk ∈ π1 V oh∗ hti be a central element. We have atk · b = b · atk for any b ∈ π1 V .
This means that hk∗ (b) = a−1 ba. Since h∗ is not a conjugation and has prime order 2, we
see that k is even. Then hk∗ = id, and a is in the center of π1 V . Since π1 V is centerless,

                                              8
we get a = 1 and conclude that the center of π1 V oh∗ hti is infinite cyclic and generated
by t2 .
    Now the image of the map π1 S 1 → π1 (T (h)) lies in the image of the two fold cover
π1 (T (h2 )). Therefore the circle action lifts to a circle action on T (h2 ). This lifting is a
splitting to the homomorphism G → S 1 and is compatible with the actions on T (h) and
T (h2 ). This implies that G ∼ = Z2 × S 1 . Since the splitting to the projection G → S 1 is
unique, the decomposition G ∼   = Z2 × S 1 is unique.

Step 5. Nontrivial circle action on T (h2 ).

    The hypothetical action (at the end, the action does not exist) of G ∼   = Z2 × S 1 on
T (h2 ) induces an action of Z2 on the quotient T (h2 )/S 1 . Although the circle action on
T (h2 ) may not be unique, we will argue that the composition V ⊂ T (h2 ) → T (h2 )/S 1
is a homotopy equivalence. For this purpose, all we need is that X = T (h2 ) is a closed
aspherical manifold with fundamental group π × Z with centerless π, and V ⊂ X is an
aspherical submanifold with fundamental group π.
    Since X is a closed aspherical manifold, according to Borel the induced map π1 S 1 →
π1 X is injective and maps into the center Z of π1 X = π × Z. By [18, Lemma 1] (also
see [33, Lemma 11.7.2]), the quotient Z/image(π1 S 1 ) contains no element of finite order.
Therefore π1 S 1 maps isomorphically onto the subgroup Z in π1 X.
    Now we claim that S 1 acts freely on X. The reason is that if a point x ∈ X is fixed
by Zk ⊂ S 1 , then the map π1 S 1 → π1 X is a composition

                           π1 S 1 → π1 (S 1 /Zk ) → π1 (S 1 x) → π1 X.

Since the first map Z → Z is multiplication by k, the image of π1 S 1 lies in kZ and cannot
be the whole subgroup Z in π1 X.
   Once we know the action is free, we have a bundle

                                      S 1 → X → X/S 1 .

Then the long exact sequence of homotopy groups implies that

                              X/S 1 ≃ K(π1 X/center(π1 X), 1).

Moreover, the composition V ⊂ X → X/S 1 induces an isomorphism on the fundamental
group. Since V is aspherical, this implies that the composition is a homotopy equivalence.

Remark. A consequence of the discussion is the homotopy uniqueness of the quotient of
the circle action. Since the quotient need not be a manifold (only a homology manifold)
and may allow variance by h-cobordism, there are many isomorphism classes of circle
actions. The issue of homology manifold can be dealt with by using the resolution theory
for homology manifolds to study the 1-parameter families of group actions. The issue of
h-cobordism disappears if the Whitehead group of π is trivial (which is a very weak part
of the Borel conjecture). The quotient is, at least in high dimensions, unique up to these
two issues.



                                               9
Step 6. T (h) × H has no nontrivial circle action.

    For an effective S 1 action on T (h), Step 4 tells us that it lifts to a free action on the
double cover T (h2 ) and Step 5 tells us that the composition V ⊂ T (h2 ) → T (h2 )/S 1 is a
homotopy equivalence.
    The double cover induces a covering involution that takes a fibre V ⊂ T (h2 ) to the
fibre V ⊂ T (h2 ) half a circle away via h. Step 4 also tells us that this involution commutes
with the lifted circle action, and therefore induces a covering involution on the quotient
T (h2 )/S 1 . Then by tracing the projection map, we find that the homotopy equivalence
V ≃ T (h2 )/S 1 takes the homotopy class of the involution h on V to the homotopy class
of the covering involution on T (h2 )/S 1 .
    Borel showed that a finite group of homeomorphisms of a closed aspherical manifold M
is represented faithfully in Out(π1 M ). Although the fact is proved in [17] for manifolds,
the proof is homological in nature and applies, with no change, to homology manifolds.
Now T (h2 )/S 1 is a (possibly homological) manifold homotopy equivalent to V . Moreover,
T (h2 )/S 1 has an involution that induces the same automorphism on π1 V as h∗ , which is
not an inner automorphism. In Step 3, we showed that this is impossible.
    Finally, we note that the discussion in Steps 4 and 5 is still valid if we multiply with a
closed aspherical manifold H with centerless fundamental group, such that the universal
cover of H has a degree one Lipschitz map to Rn (any hyperbolic manifold, for example).
So T (h) × H also has no nontrivial circle action.


References
[1] J. Block, S. Weinberger: On the generalized Nielsen realization problem, Comm.
    Math. Helv. 83(2008)21-33

[2] M. Banagl, A. Ranicki: Generalized Arf invariants in algebraic L-theory, Adv.
    Math. 199(2006)542-668

[3] A. Bartels, W. Lück: The Borel conjecture for hyperbolic and CAT(0)-groups, to
    appear in Ann. of Math.

[4] A. Bartels, W. Lück, S. Weinberger: On hyperbolic groups with spheres as
    boundaries, J. Diff. Geom. 86(2010)1-16

[5] A. Borel: On periodic maps of certain K(π, 1), In: Œuvres: Collected Papers III,
    57-60. Springer, 1983

[6] J. Bryant, S. Ferry, W. Mio, S. Weinberger: Topology of homology manifolds,
    Ann. of Math. 143(1996)435-467

[7] S. Cappell: On connected sums of manifolds, Topology 13(1974)395-400

[8] S. Cappell: Unitary nilpotent groups and Hermitian K-theory I, Bull. Amer. Math.
    Soc. 80(1974)1117-1122

[9] S. Cappell: A splitting theorem for manifolds, Invent. Math. 33(1976)69-170

                                              10
[10] G. Carlsson, E. Pedersen: Controlled algebra and the Novikov conjectures for
    K- and L-theory, Topology 34(1995)731-758

[11] A. Casson, D. Jungreis: Convergence groups and Seifert fibered 3-manifolds,
    Invent. Math. 118(1994)441-456

[12] R. Charney, M. Davis: Strict hyperbolization, Topology 34(1995)239-350

[13] F. Connolly, J. Davis: The surgery obstruction groups of the infinite dihedral
    group, Geom. Topol. 8(2004)1043-1078

[14] F. Connolly, J. Davis, Q. Kahn: Topological rigidity and H1 -negative involutions
    on tori, (preprint)

[15] P. Conner, F. Raymond: Actions of compact Lie groups on aspherical manifolds,
    In: Topology of Manifolds, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia 1969, 227-264.
    Markham, Chicago 1970

[16] P. Conner, F. Raymond: Injective operations of the toral groups, Topology
    10(1971)283-296

[17] P. Conner, F. Raymond: Manifolds with few periodic homeomorphisms, In: Pro-
    ceedings of the Second Conference on Compact Transformation Groups, University of
    Massachusetts, Amherst 1971, 1-75, Lecture Notes in Math. 299. Springer, 1972

[18] P. Conner, F. Raymond: Realizing finite groups of homeomorphism from ho-
    motopy classes of self-homotopy equivalences, In: Manifolds-Tokyo, Proc. Int. Conf.,
    Tokyo 1973, 231-238. Univ. Tokyo Press, Tokyo 1970

[19] M. Davis: Groups generated by reflections and aspherical manifolds not covered by
    Euclidean space, Ann. of Math. 117(1983)293-324

[20] M. Davis: Exotic aspherical manifolds, In: Topology of High-dimensional Manifolds,
    371-404, ITCP Lect. Notes 9, Abdus Salam Int. Cent. Theo. Phys., Trieste, 2002

[21] M. Davis, T. Januszkiewicz: Hyperbolization of polyhedra, J. Diff. Geom.
    34(1999)347-388

[22] M. Davis, T. Januszkiewicz, S. Weinberger: Relative hyperbolization and
    aspherical bordisms, J. Diff. Geom. 58(2001)535-541

[23] M. do Carmo: Riemannian geometry. Birkhäuser, Boston, 1992

[24] K. H. Dovermann: Diffeomorphism classification of finite group actions on disks,
    Topo. and its Appl. 16(1983)123-133

[25] F. T. Farrell: The Borel conjecture, In: Topology of High-dimensional Manifolds,
    225-298, ITCP Lect. Notes 9, Abdus Salam Int. Cent. Theo. Phys., Trieste, 2002

[26] F. T. Farrell, W. C. Hsiang: On Novikov’s conjecture for nonpositively curved
    manifolds I, Ann. of Math. 113(1981)199-209

                                          11
[27] S. Ferry, E. Pedersen: Epsilon surgery theory, In: Novikov Conjectures, In-
    dex Theorems and Rigidity, vol.2 (Oberwolfach, 1993), 167-226, London Math. Soc.
    Lecture Note Ser. 227. Cambridge Univ. Press, 1995

[28] S. Ferry, S. Weinberger: Curvature, tangentiality, and controlled topology, In-
    vent. Math. 105(1991)401-414

[29] S. Ferry, S. Weinberger: A coarse approach to the Novikov conjecture, In:
    Novikov Conjectures, Index Theorems and Rigidity, vol.1 (Oberwolfach, 1993), 167-
    226, London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser. 226. Cambridge Univ. Press, 1995

[30] D. Gabai: Convergence groups are Fuchsian groups, Ann. of Math. 58(2001)535-541

[31] M. Gromov: Hyperbolic groups, In: Essays in Group Theory, 75-263, Math. Sci.
    Res. Inst. Publ. 8. Springer, 1987

[32] M. Gromov, I. Piatetski-Shapiro: Nonarithmetic groups in Lobachevsky spaces,
    Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 66(1988)93-103.

[33] K. B. Lee, F. Raymond: Seifert Fiberings. Math. Surv. and Mono. 166, AMS,
    2010.

[34] R. Lee, F. Raymond: Manifolds covered by Euclidean space, Topology 14(1975)49-
    57

[35] F. Paulin: Constructions of hyperbolic groups via hyperbolizations of polyhedra, In:
    Group Theory from a Geometrical Viewpoint, Trieste, 1990, 313-372. World Scientific,
    1991

[36] T. Petrie: Pseudoequivalences of G-manifolds, Proc. Symp. Pure. Math.
    32(1978)169-210

[37] A. Preissmann: Quelques propriétés globales des espaces de Riemann, Comment.
    Math. Helv. 15(1943)175-216

[38] F. Quinn: Ends of maps II, Invent. Math. 68(1982)353-424

[39] F. Quinn: Resolutions of homology manifolds, and the topological characterization
    of manifolds. Invent. Math. 72(1983)267-284

[40] A. Ranicki: The algebraic theory of surgery I, II, Proc. London Math. Soc.
    40(1980)87-283

[41] J. Rosenberg, S. Weinberger: An equivariant Novikov conjecture, with an ap-
    pendix by J. P. May, K-Theory 4(1990)2953

[42] J. Shaneson:     Wall’s surgery obstuction groups for Z × G, Ann. of Math.
    90(1969)296-334

[43] C. T. C. Wall:        Finiteness conditions for CW-complexes, Ann. of Math.
    81(1965)56-69

                                           12
[44] C. T. C. Wall: Surgery on Compact Manifolds. Academic Press, 1971.

[45] S. Weinberger: Constructions of group actions, In: Group Actions on Manifolds,
    A Survey of Some Recent Developments (Boulder, 1983), 269-298, Contemp. Math.
    36. AMS, 1985

[46] S. Weinberger: The Topological Classification of Stratified Spaces. University of
    Chicago Press, 1993

[47] M. Weiss: Visible L-theory, Forum Math. 4(1992)465-498




                                         13
