             Exotic aspherical manifolds
                      Michael W. Davis
                  The Ohio State University
                 Department of Mathematics
                 Columbus, Ohio 43210–1174
                       United States
                mdavis@math.ohio-state.edu


Contents
1 The geometric realization of a simplicial complex      2

2 Cubical cell complexes                                3

3 The cubical complex PL                                4

4 The universal cover of PL and the group WL            4

5 When is P̃L contractible?                             6

6 Nonpositive curvature                                  7

7 Another construction of PL and P̃L                    8

8 The reflection group trick                            11

9 Aspherical manifolds not covered by Euclidean space   12

10 The reflection group trick, continued                14

11 The Assembly Map Conjecture                          14



                                1
12 Aspherical manifolds which cannot be
   smoothed                                                                  17

13 Further applications of the reflection group trick                        17

14 Hyperbolization                                                           18

15 An orientable hyperbolization procedure                                   22

16 A nontriangulable aspherical 4-manifold                                   24

17 Relative hyperbolization                                                  27

18 Comments on the references                                                31


1     The geometric realization of a simplicial
      complex
A simplicial complex L consists of a set I (called the vertex set) and a col-
lection of finite subsets S(L) of I such that

    • ∅ ∈ S(L)

    • for each i ∈ I, {i} ∈ S(L), and

    • if σ ∈ S(L) and τ < σ, then τ ∈ S(L).

An element σ of S(L) is called a simplex; its dimension is defined by dim σ =
Card(σ) − 1.
    Let us assume that I = {1, 2, . . . , m}. The standard (m − 1)-simplex on
I, denoted by ∆m−1 , is the convex polytope in Rm defined by intersecting
the positive quadrant (defined by xi ≥ 0 for all i ∈ I) with the hyperplane
Σxi = 1. A vertex of ∆m−1 is an element ei of the standard basis for Rm .
The poset of faces of ∆m−1 , denoted F(∆m−1 ), is isomorphic to the poset of
all nonempty subsets of I. This gives us a simplicial complex which we will
also denote by ∆m−1 . (Usual practice is to blur the distinction between a
simplicial complex and its geometric realization.)
    If σ is a nonempty subset of I (= {1, . . . m}), then let ∆σ denote the face
of ∆m−1 spanned by {ei }i∈σ .

                                        2
    If L is a simplicial complex with vertex set I, then its geometric realization
is defined to be the union of all subspaces of ∆m−1 of the form ∆σ for some
σ ∈ S(L). The geometric realization will also be denoted L.


2     Cubical cell complexes
As before, I = {1, . . . , m}. The standard m-dimensional cube is the convex
polytope [-1,1]m ⊂ Rm . For each subset σ of I let Rσ denote the linear
subspace spanned by {ei }i∈σ and let σ denote the standard cube in Rσ . (If
σ = ∅, then R∅ = ∅ = {0}.) The faces of [-1,1]m which are parallel to σ
have the form v + σ for some vertex v of [-1,1]m .
    Next we want to describe the poset of nonempty faces of [-1,1]m . For each
i ∈ I, let ri : [-1,1]m →[-1,1]m denote the orthogonal reflection across the
hyperplane xi = 0. Let J be the group of symmetries of [-1,1]m generated
by {ri }i∈I . Then J is isomorphic to (Z/2)m . The group J acts simply
transitively on the vertex set of [-1,1]m . The stabilizer of a face v + σ is
the subgroup Jσ generated by {ri }i∈σ . Hence, the poset of nonempty faces
of [-1,1]m is isomorphic to the poset of cosets
                                    a
                                       J/Jσ .
                                    σ⊂I

    Roughly, a cubical cell complex P is a regular cell complex in which each
cell is combinatorially isomorphic to a standard cube of some dimension.
More precisely, P consists of a poset F(= F(P )) such that for each c ∈ F
the subposet F≤c is isomorphic to the poset of nonempty faces of [-1,1]k ; k
is the dimension of c. (Here F≤c = {x ∈ F|x ≤ c}.) The elements of F
are called cells. A vertex of P is synonymous with a 0-dimensional cell. By
definition, the link of a vertex v in P , denoted by Lk(v, P ), is the subposet
F>v of all cells which are strictly greater than v (i.e., which have v as a
vertex.) For example, if v is a vertex of [-1,1]m , then Lk(v, [-1,1]m ) is the
simplicial complex ∆m−1 . It follows that the link of a vertex in any cubical
cell complex is a simplicial complex.
    The geometric realization of a cubical complex P can be defined by pasting
together standard cubes, one for each element of F. A neighborhood of a
vertex v in (the geometric realization of) P is homeomorphic to the cone on
Lk(v, P ).


                                          3
3     The cubical complex PL
Given a simplicial complex L with vertex set I, we shall now define a sub-
complex PL of [-1,1]m . The vertex set of PL will be the same as that of
[-1,1]m . The main property of PL will be that the link of each of its vertices
is isomorphic to L. The construction is very similar to the way in which we
realized L as a subcomplex of ∆m−1 .
     By definition, PL is the union of all faces of [-1,1]m which are parallel to
σ for some σ ∈ S(L). Hence, the poset of cells of PL can be identified with
                                   a
                                         J/Jσ .
                                  σ∈S(L)


(This construction is also described in [2] as well as in [12].)

Examples 3.1.

    • If L = ∆m−1 , then PL =[-1,1]m .

    • If L = ∂(∆m−1 ), then PL is the boundary of an m-cube i.e., PL is
      homeomorphic to S m−1 .

    • If L is the disjoint union of m points, then PL is the 1-skeleton of an
      m-cube.

    • If m = 3 and L is the disjoint union of a 1-simplex and a point then
      PL is the subcomplex of the 3-cube consisting of the top and bottom
      faces and the 4 vertical edges.

   From the fact that a neighborhood of a vertex in PL is homeomorphic to
the cone on L we get the following.

Proposition 3.2. If L is homeomorphic to S n−1 , then PL is an n-manifold.

Proof. The cone on S n−1 is homeomorphic to an n-disk.


4     The universal cover of PL and the group WL
Let P̃L denote the universal cover of PL . The cubical cell structure on PL
lifts to a cubical structure on P̃L . The group J (∼
                                                   = (Z/2)m ) acts on PL . Let

                                         4
WL denote the group of all lifts of elements of J to P̃L and let ϕ : WL → J
be the homomorphism induced by the projection P̃L → PL . We have a short
exact sequence,
                                           ϕ
                      1 → π1 (PL ) → WL → J → 1.
We will use the notation: ΓL = π1 (PL ).
    Since J acts simply transitively on the vertex set of PL , the group WL acts
simply transitively on the vertex set of P̃L . It follows that the 2-skeleton of P̃L
is the Cayley 2-complex associated to a presentation of WL . (In particular,
the 1-skeleton is the Cayley graph associated to a set of generators.) Next,
we use this observation to write down a presentation for WL .
    The vertex set of PL can be identified with J. Fix a vertex v of PL
(corresponding to the identity element in J). Let ṽ be a lift of v in P̃L . The
1-cells at v or at ṽ correspond to vertices of L, i.e., to elements of {1, . . . , m}.
The reflection ri stabilizes the ith 1-cell at v. Let si denote the unique lift of
ri which stabilizes the ith 1-cell at ṽ. Since s2i fixes ṽ and covers the identity
on PL , it follows that s2i = 1. Suppose σ is a 1-simplex of L connecting
vertices i and j. The corresponding 2-cell at ṽ is then a square with edges
labelled successively by si , sj , si , sj . Hence, we get a relation (si sj )2 = 1 for
each 1-simplex {i, j} of L.
    Let ŴL denote the group defined by this presentation, i.e., a set of gen-
erators for ŴL is {si }i∈I and the relations are given by: s2i = 1, for all i ∈ I,
and (si sj )2 = 1 whenever {i, j} is a 1-simplex of L. The Cayley 2-complex
associated to this presentation maps to the 2-skeleton of P̃L by a covering
projection. Since P̃L is simply connected, this covering projection is a home-
omorphism and the natural homomorphism ŴL → WL is an isomorphism.
Therefore, we have proved the following.

Proposition 4.1. WL has the presentation described above.

Remarks 4.2.

   • A group with a presentation of the above form is a Coxeter group, in
     fact, it is a “right-angled” Coxeter group. (In a general Coxeter group
     we allow relations of the form (si sj )mij = 1, where the integers mij can
     be > 2.)

   • Examining the presentation, we see that the abelianization of WL is J.
     Thus, ΓL is the commutator subgroup of WL .


                                          5
    For each subset σ of I, let Wσ denote the subgroup generated by {si }i∈σ .
If σ ∈ S(L), then Wσ is the stabilizer of the corresponding cube in P̃L which
contains ṽ (and so, for σ ∈ S(L), Wσ ∼   = (Z/2)Card(σ) ). It follows that the
poset of cells of P̃L is isomorphic to the poset of cosets,
                                  a
                                       WL /Wσ .
                                σ∈S(L)



5    When is P̃L contractible?
Definition 5.1. A simplicial complex L is a flag complex if any finite set of
vertices which are pairwise connected by edges spans a simplex of L.
    The following theorem is proved in [5]. Proofs can also be found in [8] or
[12].
Theorem 5.2. P̃L is contractible if and only if L is a flag complex.
Definition 5.3. A path connected space X is aspherical if πi (X) = 0, for
all i ≥ 2.
   Suppose that a space X has the homotopy type of a CW complex. A
basic fact of covering space theory is that the higher homotopy groups of X
(that is, the groups πi (X), for i ≥ 2) are isomorphic to those of its universal
cover X̃. Thus, X is aspherical if and only if X̃ is contractible. Therefore,
we have the following corollary to Theorem 5.2.
Corollary 5.4. PL is aspherical if and only if L is a flag complex.
    Before sketching the proof of Theorem 5.2 in Section 7, we make a few
comments on the nature of flag complexes.
    An incidence relation on a set I is a symmetric and reflexive relation R.
A flag in I is defined to be a finite subset of I of pairwise incident elements.
The poset Flag(R) of nonempty flags in I is then a simplicial complex with
vertex set I. It is obviously a flag complex. Conversely, any flag complex
arises from this construction. (Indeed, given a flag complex L define two
vertices to be incident if they are connected by an edge; if R denotes this
incidence relation, then L = Flag(R).)
    Given a poset, we can symmetrize the partial order relation to get an
incidence relation. A flag is then a finite chain of elements in the poset. If P

                                         6
is a poset, then let Flag(P) denote the flag complex of chains in P. If F is
the poset of nonempty cells in a regular convex cell complex P , then Flag(F)
can be identified the poset of simplices in the barycentric subdivision of P .
It follows that the condition of being a flag complex does not restrict the
topological type of L: it can be any polyhedron.

Example 5.5. A polygon is a simplicial complex homeomorphic to S 1 . It is
a k-gon if it has k edges. A k-gon is a flag complex if and only if k > 3.

Remarks 5.6.

    • Gromov in [16] has used the terminology that a simplicial complex
      L satisfies the “no ∆ condition” to mean that it is a flag complex.
      The idea is that L is a flag complex if and only if it has no “missing
      simplices”.

    • A flag complex is a simplicial complex which is, in a certain sense,
      “determined by its 1-skeleton”. Indeed, suppose Λ is a 1-dimensional
      simplicial complex. Then Λ determines an incidence relation on its
      vertex set. The associated flag complex L is constructed by filling in
      the missing simplices corresponding to the complete subgraphs of Λ.
      (So Λ is the 1-skeleton of L.)

    • The graph Λ also provides the data for a presentation of a right-angled
      Coxeter group W (= WΛ ). In this case, the associated flag complex L
      is called the nerve of the Coxeter group.


6     Nonpositive curvature
The notion of “nonpositive curvature” makes sense for a more general class
of metric spaces than Riemannian manifolds. A geodesic in a metric space
X is a path γ : [a, b] → X which is an isometric embedding. X is called
a geodesic space if any two points can be connected by a geodesic segment.
A triangle in a geodesic space X is the image of three geodesic segments
meeting at their endpoints. Given a triangle T in X, there is a triangle T ∗
in R2 with the same edge lengths. T ∗ is called a comparison triangle for T .
To each point x ∈ T there is a corresponding point x∗ ∈ T ∗ . The triangle T
is said to satisfy the CAT (0)-inequality, if given any two points x, y ∈ T we


                                      7
have d(x, y) ≤ d(x∗ , y ∗ ). The space X is nonpositively curved if the CAT (0)-
inequality holds for all sufficiently small triangles. X is a CAT (0)-space (or
a Hadamard space) if it is complete and if the CAT (0)-inequality holds for
all triangles in X. It follows immediately from the definitions that there is
a unique geodesic between any two points in a CAT (0)-space and from this
that any CAT (0)-space is contractible. Gromov observed that the universal
cover of a complete nonpositively curved geodesic space is CAT (0). Hence,
any such nonpositively curved space is aspherical. (An excellent reference for
this material is [2].)
    Next, suppose that P is a connected cubical cell complex. There is a
natural piecewise Euclidean metric on P . Roughly speaking, it is defined
by declaring each cell of P to be (locally) isometric to a standard Euclidean
cube (of edge length 2). More precisely, the distance between two points
x, y ∈ P is defined to be the infimum of the lengths of all piecewise linear
curves connecting x to y. It then can be shown that P is a complete geodesic
space. Gromov [16, p. 122] proved the following.

Lemma 6.1 (Gromov’s Lemma). A cubical cell complex P is nonpositively
curved if and only if the link of each of its vertices is a flag complex.

   A corollary is that the previously constructed cubical complex P̃L is
CAT (0) if and only if L is a flag complex. In particular, this gives a proof in
one direction of Theorem 5.2: if L is a flag complex, then P̃L is contractible.
(A proof of Gromov’s Lemma can be found in [2], [8], or [12].)


7       Another construction of PL and P̃L
The group J (= (Z/2)m ) acts as a group generated by reflection on [-1,1]m .
The subspace [0,1]m is a fundamental domain. (Also, [0,1]m can be identified
with the orbit space of the J-action.) Let e be the vertex (1, . . . , 1) ∈[0,1]m
and for each subset σ of I (= {1, . . . , m}) let +                    m
                                                   σ = (e + σ )∩ [0,1] .
   The corresponding fundamental domain K for the J-action on PL is given
by                                        \
                             K = PL [0, 1]m .
Thus,                                  [
                                K=             +
                                                σ
                                      σ∈S(L)



                                       8
For each i ∈ I let [0,1]m i denote the intersection of the fixed point set of ri
with [0,1] , i.e., [0,1]i =[0,1]m ∩ {xi = 0}. Set
          m             m                                            m
                                                   S Ki = K ∩ [0, 1]i and call it
a mirror of K. It is not difficult to see that Ki can be identified with the
barycentric subdivision of L, that Ki is the closed star of the vertex i in this
barycentric subdivision and that K is homeomorphic to the cone on L.
    For each x ∈ K, let σ(x) = {i ∈ I|x ∈ Ki }. The space PL can be
constructed by pasting together copies of K, one for each element of J.
More precisely, define an equivalence relation ∼ on J × K by (g, x) ∼ (g 0 , x0 )
if and only if x = x0 and g −1 g 0 ∈ Jσ(x) . (In other words, ∼ is the equivalence
relation generated by identifying g × Ki with gri × Ki , for all i ∈ I and
g ∈ J.) Then
                               PL ∼ = (J × K)/ ∼ .
Similarly,
                               P̃L ∼
                                   = (WL × K)/ ∼
where the equivalence relation on WL × K is defined in an analogous fashion.
     Let L̂ denote the flag complex determined by the 1-skeleton of L. Thus,
L̂ is the nerve of WL : σ ∈ S(L̂) if and only if Wσ is finite. For each σ ∈ S(L̂),
set                                      [
                                   Kσ =     Ki
                                         i∈σ

   We are now in position to prove two lemmas which imply Theorem 5.2.

Lemma 7.1. The following conditions are equivalent.

    (i) L is a flag complex.

    (ii) For each σ ∈ S(L̂), K σ is contractible.

    (iii) For each σ ∈ S(L̂), K σ is acyclic.

Proof. If L is a flag complex, then L = L̂ and K σ can be identified with a
closed regular neighborhood of σ in the barycentric subdivision of L. Hence,
(i)⇒ (ii). The implication (ii)⇒(iii) is obvious. If σ ∈ S(L̂) is a k-simplex
such that ∂σ ⊂ L but σ ⊂   \ L, then K σ has the homology of a (k − 1)-sphere
(since each Ki , i ∈ σ, as well as each proper family of intersections of the Ki
is contractible). Hence, (iii)⇒(i).




                                        9
   For each w ∈ W , let σ(w) = {i ∈ I|`(wsi ) < `(w)}. Here ` : W → N
denotes word length. Thus, σ(w) is the set of letters with which a minimal
word for w can end. Geometrically, it indexes the set of mirrors of wK such
that the adjacent chamber wsi K is one chamber closer to the base chamber
K. The following is a basic fact about Coxeter groups (its proof, which can
be found in [5], is omitted).

Lemma 7.2. For each w ∈ WL , σ(w) ∈ S(L̂). (In other words, for any w,
σ(w) generates a finite subgroup of WL .)

   Now we can sketch the proof of Theorem 5.2: that P̃L is contractible if
and only if L is a flag complex.
Proof of Theorem 5.2. First note that P̃L is simply connected. Hence, it suf-
fices to compute the homology of P̃L . Order the elements of WL : w1 , w2 , . . . ,
so that `(wk+1 ) ≥ `(wk ). Set Yk = w1 K ∪ · · · ∪ wk K. Then wk K ∩ Yk−1 ∼       =
K σ(wk ) . Hence, H∗ (Yk , Yk−1 ) ∼
                                  = H∗ (K, K σ(wk ) ) ∼
                                                      = H̃∗−1 (K σ(wk ) ), where the
second isomorphism holds since K is contractible. The exact sequence of the
pair (Yk , Yk−1 ) gives

                   → H∗ (Yk−1 ) → H∗ (Yk ) → H∗ (K, K σ(wk ) )

The map H∗ (Yk ) → H∗ (K, K σ(wk ) ) is a split surjection. Indeed, a splitting
ϕ∗ : H∗ (K, K σ(wk ) ) → H∗ (Yk ) can be defined by the formula:
                                     X
                          ϕ(α) =           (−1)`(u) wk uα
                                  u∈Wσ(wk )


where α is a relative cycle in C∗ (K, K σ(wk ) ). It is then easy to see that
ϕ(α) is a cycle and that the induced map on homology is a splitting. Thus,
H∗ (Yk ) ∼
         = H∗ (Yk−1 ) ⊕ H∗ (K, K σ(wk ) ), and consequently,
                                       ∞
                          H̃∗ (P̃L ) ∼
                                     = ⊕ H̃∗−1 (K σ(wk ) ).
                                      i=1


Thus, P̃L is acyclic if and only if each K σ(wk ) is acyclic. The theorem follows
from Lemmas 7.1 and 7.2.
   Henceforth, we shall always assume that L is a flag complex. Moreover,
we shall use the notation ΣL instead of P̃L .


                                         10
8        The reflection group trick
Next we modify the construction of the previous section.
    Suppose X is a space and that ∂X is a subspace which is homeomorphic
to a polyhedron. Let L be a triangulation of ∂X as a flag complex with
vertex set I. For each i ∈ I, put Xi = Ki where Ki is the previously defined
subcomplex of the barycentric subdivision of L. In other words, Xi is the
closed star of the vertex i in the barycentric subdivision of L (= ∂X). Let
J, WL and ΓL be the groups defined previously. Set
                              PL (X) = (J × X)/ ∼
and
                             ΣL (X) = (WL × X)/ ∼,
where the equivalence relations are defined exactly as before.
    We record a few elementary properties of this construction. The orbit
space of the J-action on PL (X) is X. Let r : PL (X) → X be the orbit map.
Since X can also be regarded as a subspace of PL (X) (namely as the image
of 1 × X), we have the following theorem.
Theorem 8.1. The map r : PL (X) → X is a retraction.
Corollary 8.2. π1 (X) is a retract of π1 (PL (X)).
Theorem 8.3. If X is a compact n-dimensional manifold with boundary
(= ∂X), then PL (X) is a closed n-manifold.
Proof. For each x ∈ X, let σ(x) = {i ∈ I|x ∈ XI }. A neighborhood of x in
                          σ(x)                               σ(x)
∂X has the form Rn−k ×R+ where k = Card(σ(x)), where R+ denotes the
positive quadrant in Rσ(x) where all coordinates are nonnegative. It follows
                                                                    σ(x)
that a neighborhood of (1, x) in PL (X) has the form Rn−k ×(Jσ(x) ×R+ )/ ∼
which is homeomorphic to Rn . Thus, PL (X) is an n-manifold.
   We also have that ΣL (X) → PL (X) is a regular covering with group of
deck transformation ΓL . The proof of the next proposition is the same as
the proof of Theorem 5.2 given in Section 7.
Proposition 8.4. (i) If X is simply connected, then ΣL (X) is the universal
cover of PL (X) and hence, π1 (PL (X)) = ΓL .
   (ii) If X is contractible, then ΣL (X) is contractible.
       Further discussion of the reflection group trick can be found in [5] and
[7].

                                        11
9    Aspherical manifolds not covered by Eu-
     clidean space
Suppose Y is a reasonable space (for example, suppose Y is a locally compact,
locally path connected, second countable Hausdorff space). Also, suppose
Y is not compact. A neighborhood of infinity in Y is the complement of
a compact set. Y is one-ended if every neighborhood of infinity contains a
connected neighborhood of infinity. A one-ended space Y is simply connected
at infinity if for any compact subset C ⊂ Y there is a larger compact subset
C 0 ⊃ C such that for any loop γ in Y − C 0 , γ is null-homotopic in Y − C.
    For example, Rn is one-ended for n ≥ 2 and simply connected at infinity
for n ≥ 3. The following characterization of Euclidean space was proved by
Stallings for n ≥ 5 and by Freedman for n = 4. For n = 3, the corresponding
result is not known (it is a version of the 3-dimensional Poincaré Conjecture).
Theorem 9.1. (Stallings [26] and Freedman [15]) Let M n be a contractible
n-manifold, n ≥ 4. Then M n is homeomorphic to Rn if and only if it is
simply connected at infinity.
    In certain circumstances it is possible to define a “fundamental group
at infinity” for a one-ended space Y . Suppose that SC1 ⊂ C2 ⊂ . . . is an
exhaustive sequence of compact subsets (i.e., Y =           Ci ). This gives an
inverse system of fundamental groups, π1 (Y − C1 ) ← π1 , (Y − C2 ) ← . . . .
In general, an inverse sequence of groups, G1 ← G2 ← . . . , is Mittag-Leffler
if there is a function f : N → N such that the image of Gk in Gn is the
same for all k ≥ f (n). The space Y is semistable if there is such an inverse
system of fundamental groups which is Mittag-Leffler. If this condition holds
for one such choice of inverse system, then it holds for all such choices and
the resulting inverse limit is independent of the choice of base points. Hence,
when Y is semistable, we can define its fundamental group at infinity, denoted
by π1∞ (Y ), to be the inverse limit, lim π1 (Y − Ck ).
                                     ←

Definition 9.2. A closed manifold N n is a homology n-sphere if H∗ (N n ) ∼
                                                                          =
     n
H∗ (S )
    Poincaré originally conjectured that any homology 3-sphere was homeo-
morphic to S 3 . However, he soon discovered a counterexample. It was S 3 /G,
where S 3 is regarded as the Lie group SU (2) and where G is the binary
icosahedral group (a subgroup of order 120). (In order to prove that S 3 /G

                                      12
was not homeomorphic to the 3-sphere, Poincaré invented the concept of the
fundamental group and proved that it was a topological invariant.) It turns
out that, for n ≥ 3, there are many other examples of homology spheres
N n which are not simply connected (however, note that π1 (N n ) must be a
perfect group).
   For n ≥ 5, the next result is an easy consequence of surgery theory. For
n = 4, it was proved by Freedman [15]. (For n = 4, the result holds only in
the category of topological manifolds.)
Theorem 9.3. Let N n−1 be a homology (n − 1)-sphere. Then there is a
compact contractible n-manifold with boundary X such that ∂X = N n−1 .
    Now suppose that a flag complex L is a homology (n − 1)-sphere and
that X n is a contractible n-manifold with ∂X = L. By Theorem 8.3 and
Proposition 8.4, PL (X) is an aspherical n-manifold and its universal cover
ΣL (X) is a contractible n-manifold.
Proposition 9.4. Suppose, as above, that L is a homology (n − 1)-sphere
bounding a contractible n-manifold X. If L is not simply connected, then
ΣL (X) is not simply connected at infinity.
Proof. As in the proof of Theorem 5.2 at the end of Section 7, order the
elements of WL : w1 , w2 , . . . so that `(wk+1 ) ≥ `(wk ) and put
                            Yk = w1 X ∪ · · · ∪ wk X.
Then Yk is a contractible manifold with boundary. Let Y k denote the com-
plement of an open collared neighborhood of ∂Yk in Yk . Then it is easy
to see that ΣL (X) − Y k is homotopy equivalent to ∂Yk . Moreover, since
wk X ∩ Yk−1 ∼
            = K σ(wk ) , which is an (n − 1)-disk, it follows that ∂Yk is the
connected sum of k copies of ∂X (= L). Hence, if n ≥ 3, π1 (∂Yk ) is the free
product of k copies of π1 (L) and the inverse system of fundamental groups
is,
                        π1 (L) ← π1 (L) ∗ π1 (L) ← . . .
Thus, if π1 (L) is not trivial, then neither is π1∞ (ΣL (X)).
   As a corollary of Proposition 9.4 and the fact that there exist homology
(n − 1)-spheres with nontrivial fundamental groups for all n ≥ 4, we have
proved the following result of [5].
Theorem 9.5. For each n ≥ 4, there is a closed aspherical n-manifold (of
the form PL (X)) such that its universal cover is not homeomorphic to Rn .

                                       13
10      The reflection group trick, continued
As before, suppose (X, ∂X) is a pair of spaces and L is a triangulation of
∂X as a flag complex.

Theorem 10.1. If X is aspherical, then so is PL (X).

Proof. It suffices to show that the covering space ΣL (X) of PL (X) is aspher-
ical. Order the elements of WL as before and set Yk = w1 X ∪ · · · ∪ wk X.
Then, Yk is formed by gluing on a copy of X to Yk−1 . Since wk X ∩ Yk−1 is
contractible, Yk is homotopy equivalent to Yk−1 ∨X and hence, to X ∨· · ·∨X
(k times). Since X is aspherical, so is Yk . Since ΣL (X) is the increasing union
of the Yk , ΣL (X) is also aspherical.

Definition 10.2. A group π is of type F if its classifying space Bπ has the
homotopy type of a finite complex. (Bπ is also called the “K(π, 1)-complex.”)

    If B is a finite CW complex, then we can “thicken” it to a compact
manifold with boundary. This means that we can find a compact manifold
with boundary X which is homotopy equivalent to B. The proof goes as
follows. First, up to homotopy, we can assume that B is a finite simplicial
complex. The next step is to piecewise linearly embed B in some Euclidean
space Rn . So, we can assume B is a subcomplex of some triangulation of Rn .
Finally, possibly after taking barycentric subdivisions, we can replace B by
a regular neighborhood X in Rn .
    The “reflection group trick” can then be summarized as follows. Start
with a group π of type F . After thickening we may assume that Bπ is a
compact manifold with boundary X. Triangulate ∂X as a flag complex L.
Then PL (X) is a closed aspherical manifold which retracts onto Bπ.


11      The Assembly Map Conjecture
Conjecture 11.1 (The Borel Conjecture). Let (M, ∂M ) and (M 0 , ∂M 0 )
be aspherical manifolds with boundary and f : (M, ∂M ) → (M 0 , ∂M 0 ) a
homotopy equivalence such that f |∂M is a homeomorphism. Then f is homo-
topic rel ∂M to a homeomorphism.

   In the case where ∂M = ∅, the Borel Conjecture asserts that two closed
aspherical manifolds with the same fundamental group are homeomorphic.

                                       14
     Suppose (X, ∂X) is a pair of finite complexes with π1 (X) = π. Then
(X, ∂X) is a Poincaré pair of dimension n if there is a Zπ-module D which is
isomorphic to Z as an abelian group and a homology class µ ∈ Hn (X, ∂X; D)
so that for any Zπ-module A, cap product with µ defines an isomorphism:
H i (X; A) ∼
           = Hn−i (X, ∂X; D ⊗ A). If ∂X = ∅, then X is a Poincaré complex.
A group π of type F is a Poincaré duality group of dimension n (or a P Dn -
group for short) if Bπ is a Poincaré complex.
Conjecture 11.2 (The P Dn -group Conjecture). Suppose π is a group
of type F and that (X, ∂X) is a Poincaré pair with X homotopy equivalent
to Bπ and with ∂X a manifold. Then (X, ∂X) is homotopy equivalent rel
∂X to a compact manifold with boundary.
   A weak version of this conjecture replaces the word manifold by “ANR
homology manifold.”
   In the absolute case, where ∂X = ∅, the P Dn -group Conjecture asserts
that for any P Dn -group π of type F , Bπ is homotopy equivalent to a closed
manifold.
   As is explained elsewhere in this volume, there is a surgery exact sequence:
      . . . Ln+1 (Zπ) → S(X, ∂X) → [(X, ∂X), (G/T OP, ∗)] → Ln (Zπ)
where S(X, ∂X) denotes the structure set, G/T OP is a certain space, π =
π1 (X) and where Ln (Zπ) denotes Wall’s surgery group for Zπ. The surgery
groups are 4-periodic. The homotopy groups of G/T OP are also 4-periodic
and are given by the formula:
                               
                               Z,
                                      if i ≡ 0 (mod 4);
                 πi (G/T OP ) = Z/2, if i ≡ 2 (mod 4);
                               
                                0,     otherwise
                               

Moreover, the 4-fold loop space, Ω4 (Z × G/T OP ), is homotopy equivalent
to Z × G/T OP . It follows that Z × G/T OP defines a spectrum L and a
generalized homology theory H∗ (X; L). It is almost, but not quite, true that

             Hn (X; L) ∼
                         M
                       =     Hn−4k (X; Z) ⊕ Hn−4k−2 (X; Z/2).
                            k

Quinn has defined an “assembly map” An : Hn (X; L) → Ln (Zπ) so that if
we use Poincaré duality to identify Hn (X; L) with [(X, ∂X), (G/T OP, ∗)] ∼
                                                                           =
 0
H (X, ∂X; L), then An is identified with the surgery obstruction map.

                                      15
Conjecture 11.3 (The Assembly Map Conjecture). Suppose π is a
group of type F . Then the assembly map A∗ : H∗ (Bπ; L) → L∗ (Zπ) is an
isomorphism.
    In dimensions ≥ 5, for a given group π of type F , it follows from the
surgery exact sequence that the truth the Assembly Map Conjecture and
the conjecture that the Whitehead group of π vanishes is equivalent to the
truth of both the Borel Conjecture and (the weak version of) the P Dn -group
Conjecture.
    Conceivably, the Assembly Map Conjecture could be true for any torsion-
free group π.
Theorem 11.4. The Assembly Map Conjecture is true for the fundamental
groups of all closed aspherical manifolds if and only if it is true for all groups
of type F .
Proof. We use the reflection group trick. Suppose π is a group of type F .
Thicken Bπ to a manifold with boundary X and triangulate ∂X as a flag
complex L. Then PL (X) is a closed aspherical manifold. Let r : PL (X) → X
be the retraction from Theorem 8.1 and let G = π1 (PL (X)). We have the
following commutative diagram:
                         Hn (PL (X); L) → Ln (ZG)

                             i∗ ↑↓ r∗           i∗ ↑↓ r∗

                            Hn (X; L)        → Ln (Zπ).

Hence, if the arrow on the top row is an isomorphism, so is the arrow on the
bottom.
Remark 11.5. A similar argument shows that the Whitehead group vanishes
for the fundamental groups of all closed aspherical manifolds if and only if it
vanishes for all groups of type F .
Remark 11.6. What these arguments show is that, in dimensions ≥ 5, if
we have a counterexample to the relative version of the Borel Conjecture
or to the relative version of the P Dn -group Conjecture, then the reflection
group trick will provide us with a counterexample in the absolute case. For
example, suppose f : (M, ∂M ) → (M 0 , ∂M 0 ) is a counterexample to the
Borel Conjecture. We might as well assume that ∂M = ∂M 0 = L and that

                                        16
f |∂M =id. Then f induces a homotopy equivalence PL (M ) → PL (M 0 ) which
is not homotopy equivalent to a homeomorphism. Similarly, if (X, ∂X) is
a counterexample to the P Dn -group Conjecture and L = ∂X, then G =
π1 (PL (X)) is a P Dn -group which is not the fundamental group of a closed
aspherical manifold.


12      Aspherical manifolds which cannot be
        smoothed
Suppose (X, ∂X) is a compact aspherical n-manifold with boundary and that
∂X is triangulable. Suppose further that the Spivak normal fibration of X
does not reduce to a linear vector bundle. (In other words, a certain map
X → BG does not lift to BO.) Apply the reflection group trick with L = ∂X.
Since X is codimension 0 in PL (X) and since X is a retract of PL (X), the
Spivak normal fibration of PL (X) does not reduce to linear vector bundle.
Hence, PL (X) cannot be homotopy equivalent to a smooth manifold. In [9]
J-C. Hausmann and I showed that there exist examples of such X for each
n ≥ 13, thereby proving the following result. (We will prove a stronger result
in Section 16.)

Theorem 12.1. ([9]) In each dimension ≥ 13, there is a closed aspherical
manifold not homotopy equivalent to a smooth manifold.


13      Further applications of the reflection group
        trick
The next two results were proved by G. Mess.

Theorem 13.1. (Mess [21]). For each n ≥ 4, there is a closed aspherical
n-manifold the fundamental group of which is not residually finite.

(Recall that a group Γ is residually finite if given any two elements γ1 , γ2 ∈ Γ
there is a homomorphism φ to some finite group F such that φ(γ1 ) 6= φ(γ2 ).)

Theorem 13.2. (Mess [21]). For each n ≥ 4, there is a closed aspherical
n-manifold the fundamental group of which contains an infinitely divisible
abelian group.

                                       17
  On the other hand, it is known that there are no such examples in di-
mension 3.
Remark 13.3. With regard to the first theorem, Tom Farrell pointed out
to me that Raganuthan has observed that there are cocompact lattices in
(nonlinear) Lie groups which are not virtually torsion-free and not residually
finite. (See [23].) On the other hand, it follows from Selberg’s Lemma that
any finitely generated subgroup of a linear Lie group is residually finite.
    The proofs of both theorems are similar. By a theorem of R. Lyndon [20],
if π is a finitely generated 1-relator group and if the relation cannot be written
as a proper power of another word, then the presentation 2-complex for π
is aspherical. In particular, any such π is of type F with a 2-dimensional
Bπ. This 2-complex can then be thickened to a compact 4-manifold. For
Theorem 13.1 take π to be the Baumslag-Solitar group < a, b|ab2 a−1 = b3 >.
It is known that π is not residually finite; hence, neither is any group which
contains it. For Theorem 13.2 take π to be the Baumslag-Solitar group
< a, b|aba−1 = b2 >. The centralizer of b in this group is isomorphic to a
copy of the dyadic rationals.
    S. Weinberger has noted that there are examples of finitely presented
groups π with unsolvable word problem such that Bπ is a finite 2-complex.
(See [22, Theorem 4.12].) Since any group which retracts onto such a group
also has unsolvable word problem, the reflection group trick gives the follow-
ing result.

Theorem 13.4. (Weinberger). For each n ≥ 4, there is a closed aspherical
n-manifold the fundamental group of which has unsolvable word problem.


14      Hyperbolization
“Hyperbolization” refers to certain constructions, invented by Gromov [16],
for converting any cell complex into an aspherical polyhedron (in fact, into
a nonpositively curved polyhedron). One of the key features of these con-
structions is that they preserve local structure. Thus, hyperbolization will
convert an n-manifold into an aspherical n-manifold. In this section we de-
scribe one such construction, Gromov’s “Möbius band hyperbolization pro-
cedure,” which given a cubical cell complex P produces an aspherical cubical
cell complex h(P ). Before giving the definition, we list some properties of
the construction:

                                       18
    1) The procedure is functorial in the following sense: if f : P →
     Q is a cellular embedding onto a subcomplex, then there is an
     induced embedding h(f ) : h(P ) → h(Q) onto a subcomplex.

    2) The cubical complexes P and h(P ) have the same vertex set.
     Moreover, for each vertex v, Lk(v, h(P )) is the barycentric sub-
     division of Lk(v, P ).
In particular, it follows from 2) that if P is an n-manifold, then so is h(P ).
Property 2) also shows that the link of each vertex in h(P ) is a flag complex.
Hence, by Gromov’s Lemma 6.1, the piecewise Euclidean metric on h(P ) is
nonpositively curved. Consequently, we have the following property:
    3) h(P ) is aspherical.
By functoriality, each cube  in P is converted into a subspace h() of h(P )
(called a “hyperbolized cell”). Furthermore, there is a map c : h(P ) → P ,
unique up to homotopy, which is the identity on the vertex set and which
takes each hyperbolized cell to the corresponding cell of P . The map c has
the following two properties:
    4) c induces a surjection on homology groups with coefficients in
     Z/2.

    5) c∗ : π1 (h(P )) → π1 (P ) is surjective.
We also list one final property:
    6) If P is an n-manifold, then there is an (unoriented) cobordism
     between P and h(P ).
A corollary of 6) is the following.
Theorem 14.1. if two closed aspherical manifolds M1 and M2 were cobor-
dant, then one could choose the cobordism to be an aspherical manifold with
boundary. Although I don’t know how to prove Gromov’s assertion, the con-
struction in Remark 14.2 does prove the following result. Every triangulable
manifold is cobordant to an aspherical manifold.
   The definition of h(P ) is by induction on dim P . If dim P ≤ 1, then
h(P ) = P . Suppose that the construction has been defined for all cubical
complexes of dimension < n and that properties 1) and 2) hold. Let n

                                       19
denote the standard n-cube and let a : n → n denote the antipodal map (a
is also called the “central symmetry” of n ). By induction, h(∂n ) has been
defined and by 1) the isomorphism a induces an involution h(a) : h(∂n ) →
h(∂n ). The quotient space h(∂n )/(Z/2) is also a cubical complex. We
define h(n ) to be the canonical interval bundle over h(∂n )/(Z/2), i.e.,

                          h(n ) = [-1,1] ×Z/2 h(∂n )

where Z/2 acts on the first factor via t → −t and on the second via h(a).
    Since the restriction of this interval bundle to each cell of h(∂n )/Z/2) is
a trivial bundle, h(n ) naturally has the structure of a cubical complex: each
new cell is the product of [-1,1] with a cell of h(∂n )/(Z/2). It follows that if
v is a vertex of n , then there is a (k + 1)-simplex in Lk(v, h(n )) for each k-
simplex in Lk(v, h(∂n )). Thus, Lk(v, h(n )) is the cone on Lk(v, h(∂n )).
Using induction, this implies that Lk(v, h(n )) is the barycentric subdivision
of ∆n−1 .
    We note that the boundary of h(n ) is canonically identified with h(∂n ).
(The identification is canonical because a lies in the center of the automor-
phism group of the cube.)
    Let P (k) denote the k-skeleton of a cubical complex P . If dim P = n,
then h(P ) is defined by attaching, for each n-cell n in P , a copy of h(n )
to the subcomplex h(∂n ) of h(P (n−1) ) via the canonical identification.
    Suppose that dim P = n, that f : P → Q is a cellular embedding, that
  (n−1)
f       : P (n−1) → Q(n−1) denotes the restriction to the (n − 1)-skeleton and
that h(f (n−1) ) has been defined. The map h(f ) : h(P ) → h(Q) is induced by
the map on each new cell which is the product of the identity map of [-1,1]
with h(f (n−1) ). Property 1) follows. The new links are clearly the barycentric
subdivisions of the old ones (so property 2) holds). The proof of properties
3) and 4) are straightforward and are left to the reader.
    To check property 5), let P̃ denote the universal cover of P and let π =
π1 (P ). By functorality, π acts freely on h(P̃ ) and h(P̃ ) → h(P̃ )/π is a
covering projection. In fact, it is clear that h(P̃ )/π ∼ = h(P ). This defines
an epimorphism ϕ : π1 (h(P )) → π. It is not hard to see that ϕ is just the
homomorphism induced by the canonical map c : h(P ) → P .
    To check 6), suppose that M is triangulated manifold. Let CM denote the
cone on M , i.e., CM = (M ×[0,1])/ ∼ where (x, 0) ∼ (x0 , 0) for all x, x0 ∈ M .
Let c denote the cone point. The cone on the barycentric subdivision of a k-
simplex is a standard subdivision of a (k+1)-cube. Regarding each simplex as

                                       20
the cone on its boundary, this gives a standard method for subdividing each
simplex of CM into cubes and gives CM the structure of a cubical complex.
The link of c in h(CM ) is isomorphic to the barycentric subdivision of M .
Hence, removing the open star of c from h(CM ) we obtain a cobordism
between M and h(M ) (= h(M × 1)).
Remark 14.2. There is a slight variation of the above which provides a sort of
“relative hyperbolization procedure.” Suppose Q is a subcomplex of P . Let
p : P̃ → P be the universal cover and let P̂ be the cubical complex formed
by attaching a cone to each component of p−1 (Q) in P̃ . Let h(P̂ )0 denote
the complement of small regular neighborhoods of the cone points in h(P̂ ).
By functorality, the fundamental group π = π1 (P ) acts on h(P̂ )0 . Define the
hyperbolization of P relative to Q by

                             h(P, Q) = h(P̂ )0 /π,

In general, h(P, Q) will not be aspherical. However, if Q is aspherical and
if π1 (Q) → π1 (P ) is injective, then the link of each cone point in h(P̂ ) is
contractible (since it is a copy of the universal cover of Q). Hence, h(P̂ ) and
h(P̂ )0 will be homotopy equivalent. So, in this case, h(P, Q) is aspherical.
   Not only did Gromov state Theorem 14.1, he also asserted that if an
aspherical manifold M is a boundary, then it bounds an aspherical manifold
N so that π1 (M ) → π1 (N ) is injective. We shall give a proof of this below.
First we need the following result of [17].
Theorem 14.3. (Hausmann [17]). Suppose that manifolds M1 and M2 are
cobordant. Then they are cobordant by a cobordism N such that for i = 1, 2,
π1 (Mi ) → π1 (N ) is injective.
   Shmuel Weinberger explained the following version of Hausmann’s proof
to me.
Proof. It is proved in [1, Theorem 5.5] that for any finitely generated group
G one can find a finitely generated acyclic group A such that G injects into
A. For i = 1, 2 choose an acyclic group Ai so that π1 (Mi ) injects into Ai .
Then π1 (Mi ) injects into the acyclic group A = A1 × A2 . Let Ω∗ (−) be
any bordism theory. Since A is acyclic and since Ω∗ (−) is a generalized
homology theory, it follows from the Atiyah–Hirzebruch spectral sequence
that Ω∗ (BA) → Ω∗ (point) is an isomorphism. Hence, if M1 and M2 are
bordant over a point, then they are bordant over BA. In other words, the

                                      21
fundamental group of the cobordism N maps to A by a map extending the
maps on π1 (M1 ) and π1 (M2 ). In particular, both of these fundamental groups
must inject into π1 (N ).

Theorem 14.4. Suppose that there is a triangulable cobordism between two
closed aspherical manifolds M1n and M2n . Then there is an aspherical cobor-
dism N n+1 between M1n and M2n so that for i = 1, 2, π1 (Min ) → π1 (N n+1 ) is
injective.

Proof. Let P be the cobordism
                      `       between M1 and M2 provided by Theorem
14.3 and let Q = M1 M2 . Set N = h(P, Q). By Remark 14.2, N is the
desired aspherical cobordism.
Remark 14.5. Let M n = h(∂n+1 )/(Z/2). The manifolds M n occur in na-
ture. Indeed, consider real projective space RP n and the collection of all its
coordinate hyperplanes, defined by the equations xi = 0, for 1 ≤ i ≤ n + 1.
Then M n is the manifold resulting from blowing up (in the sense of algebraic
geometry) all projective subspaces which are intersections of such coordinate
hyperplanes. It follows from this that M n can also be described as the “clo-
sure of a generic torus orbit on a real flag manifold.” More precisely, the
flag manifold is the homogeneous space SL(n + 1, R)/B where B denotes the
Borel subgroup of upper triangular matrices. The real “torus” H is the sub-
group of diagonal matrices in SL(n + 1, R). Thus, H ∼         = (R∗ )n . An H-orbit
on the homogeneous space is “generic” if it is the orbit of a flag which is in
general position with respect to the coordinate hyperplanes in Rn+1 (in other
words, it is generic if its stabilizer in H is trivial). It can then be shown that
the closure of a generic H-orbit is homeomorphic to M n , cf. [11].


15      An orientable hyperbolization procedure
The trouble with the Möbius band procedure is that the hyperbolized cells
are not orientable. Gromov [16] gave a second construction which remedied
this. We explain it below. (Further expositions of this construction can be
found in [10] and [4].)
    The rough idea behind any hyperbolization procedure is this. We first
give some functorial procedure for hyperbolizing cells. Then, given a cell
complex Λ, we define its hyperbolization by gluing together the hyperbolized
cells in the same combinatorial pattern as the cells of Λ.


                                        22
    Gromov’s second procedure can be applied to any finite dimensional sim-
plicial complex Λ. The result will be an aspherical (in fact, nonpositively
curved) cubical cell complex h(Λ). The construction will have analogous
properties to properties 1) through 6) in the previous section. In addition,
it will have the following two properties:

    7) The natural map c : h(Λ) → Λ induces on surjection on integral
     homology groups.

    8) If Λ is a manifold, then c pulls back the stable tangent bundle
     of Λ to the stable tangent bundle of h(Λ).

The definition of the construction again is by induction on dimension. In
order to define the hyperbolization of an n-dimensional simplicial complex
Λ, we first need to define the hyperbolization of an n-simplex, h(∆n ). Then,
to complete the definition of h(Λ), we need to have some fixed identification
of each n-simplex in Λ with the standard n-simplex. One way to insure this
is to assume that Λ admits a “folding map” p : Λ → ∆n , that is, a simplicial
map p which restricts to an injection on each simplex. If we replace Λ with
its barycentric subdivision Λ0 , then it admits such a folding map. Once we
have such a p, h(Λ) is defined to be the fiber product of p : Λ → ∆n and
c : h(∆n ) → ∆n . In other words, h(Λ) = {(x, y) ∈ Λ × h(∆n )|p(x) = c(y)}.
    If dim Λ ≤ 1, then, by definition, h(Λ) = Λ. Suppose that h(Λ) has been
defined for simplicial complexes of dimension < n.
    We turn now to the definition on a hyperbolized n-simplex. Each trans-
position of two vertices of ∆n induces a reflection on ∆n . In order to make
such a reflection into a simplicial isomorphism it is necessary to pass to the
barycentric subdivision (∆n )0 . Choose a reflection r : (∂∆n )0 → (∂∆n )0 . By
functorality, we have an induced involution h(r) : h((∂∆n )0 ) → h((∂∆n )0 ).
The involution h(r) acts as a reflection on the (n − 1)-manifold h((∂∆n )0 )
and its fixed point set separates h((∂∆n )0 ) into two “half-spaces” which we
denote by H+ and H− . Then h(∆n ) is defined by

                      h(∆n ) = (h((∂∆)0 ) × [-1,1])/ ∼

where the equivalence relation ∼ identifies H− × {−1} with H− × {+1}. The
boundary of h(∆n ) consists of two copies of H+ glued together along the
fixed point set of h(r), i.e., it can be identified with h((∂∆n )0 ). Another
way to describe this procedure is to form the manifold h((∂∆n )0 ) × S 1 and

                                      23
then cut it open along H+ × {1}. It follows from this that h(∆n ) is an
orientable manifold with boundary (assuming, by induction, that h((∂∆n )0 )
is orientable). Assuming further that h((∂∆n )0 ) is a cubical cell complex,
we see that h(∆n ) inherits the structure of a cubical cell complex (possibly
after subdividing the [-1,1] factor). Moreover, the link of a vertex v in h(∆n )
is the cone on Lk(v, h((∂∆n )0 )). It follows that the link of any vertex in
h(∆n ) is a flag complex and hence, that h(∆n ) is nonpositively curved. As
was explained earlier, the hyperbolization h(Λ) of an arbitrary n-dimensional
simplicial complex Λ is then defined by the fiber product construction.
    Using the fact that Hn (h(∆n ), ∂h(∆n )) ∼ = Z, it is not hard to verify
property 7). Property 8) follows from the observation that when Λ is a
manifold, h(Λ) can be identified with a submanifold of Λ × ∆n with trivial
normal bundle and from the fact that the stable tangent bundle of h(∆n ) is
trivial.
Remarks 15.1.

   • One consequence of 8) is that for any (triangulable) manifold M , the
     map c : h(M ) → M pulls back the stable characteristic classes of
     M (e.g., its Pontryagin classes and Stiefel-Whitney classes) to those
     of h(M ). Thus, the characteristic numbers of h(M ) are the same as
     those of M . This shows that the condition of being aspherical does not
     impose any restrictions on the characteristic numbers of a manifold.

   • Property 8) can be rephrased as saying that c : h(M ) → M is covered
     by a normal map.

   • The proof of Theorem 14.1 shows that c : h(M ) → M to normally
     cobordant to the identity map, id : M → M .

   • The proofs of Theorems 14.3 and 14.4 show that if aspherical mani-
     folds M1 and M2 are cobordant in any bordism theory, then they are
     cobordant, in the same theory, by an aspherical cobordism.


16     A nontriangulable aspherical 4-manifold
The E8 -form is a certain positive definite, unimodular, even, symmetric bi-
linear form on Z8 which is associated to the Dynkin diagram E8 . It is repre-



                                      24
sented by the following matrix:
                                                       
                          2 1 0       0   0   0   0   0
                         1 2 1       0   0   0   0   0 
                                                       
                         0 1 2       1   0   0   0   0 
                                                       
                         0 0 1       2   1   0   0   0 
                                                       
                         0 0 0       1   2   1   0   1 
                                                       
                         0 0 0       0   1   2   1   0 
                                                       
                         0 0 0       0   0   1   2   0 
                          0 0 0       0   1   0   0   2
(Unimodular means that the determinant of this matrix is 1; even means that
the diagonal entries are even integers.) Since the E8 is positive definite, its
signature is 8.
    The plumbing construction of Kervaire–Milnor gives a smooth, simply
connected 4-manifold with boundary, N 4 , with intersection form the E8 -form.
(One “plumbs” together 8 copies of the tangent disk bundle of S 2 according
to the diagram E8 .) It follows from the exact sequence of the pair (N 4 , ∂N 4 )
and from the fact that the E8 -form is unimodular that the boundary of
N 4 is a homology 3-sphere. It turns out that it is not simply connected.
In fact, ∂N 4 is Poincaré’s homology 3-sphere. (The same construction was
used in higher dimensions, by Kervaire–Milnor, to construct exotic spheres
of dimension 4k − 1, k ≥ 2.)
    Let Λ4 be a simplicial complex formed by triangulating N 4 and then
attaching the cone on ∂N 4 . Of course, Λ4 is not a 4-manifold since there
is no Euclidean neighborhood of the cone point. On the other hand, it is a
polyhedral homology manifold in the sense that the link of each vertex is a
homology sphere. It is called the E8 homology 4-manifold. Stiefel-Whitney
classes make sense for homology manifolds and it follows from the fact that
N 4 is stably parallelizable that the Stiefel-Whitney classes of Λ4 all vanish.
Its signature is 8.
    It is a theorem from algebra that any unimodular, even, symmetric bilin-
ear form over the integers has signature divisible by 8. For a closed orientable
4-manifold, the condition that its intersection form is even is equivalent to its
second Stiefel–Whitney class, w2 , being 0. The following is a famous theorem
of Rohlin [24].
Theorem 16.1 (Rohlin’s Theorem). For any smooth or P L closed 4-
manifold M 4 with w1 (M 4 ) = 0 = w2 (M 4 ), the signature of its intersection
form must be divisible by 16.

                                       25
    It follows that Λ4 is not homotopy equivalent to a smooth or P L 4-
manifold. On the other hand, by Freedman’s result, Theorem 9.3, there is a
contractible manifold N 0 with ∂N 0 = ∂N . Hence, Λ4 is homotopy equivalent
to the topological manifold M 4 = N ∪ N 0 . (We have replaced the cone on a
homology 3-sphere by the contractible manifold N 0 .) By Rohlin’s Theorem,
M 4 cannot be homotopy equivalent to a P L 4-manifold.
    The condition that a manifold admit a PL structure is stronger than the
condition that it be homeorphic to a simplicial complex: to have a PL struc-
ture it must, in addition, be locally piecewise linearly (PL) homeomorphic
to Euclidean space (with its standard PL structure). In particular, the link
of any vertex in a PL manifold must be PL homeomorphic to a sphere. It
is easy to see that in a general triangulated n-manifold the link of any ver-
tex must be a simply connected (provided n ≥ 3) homology manifold with
the same homology as S n−1 , but there is no reason for it to be PL homeo-
morhic to S n−1 . When n = 4, since any polyhedral homology 3-manifold is
a 3-manifold, each such link must be a homotopy 3-sphere.
    Thus, for a few years after Freedman’s result [15] was proved, it still
seemed possible that Λ4 could be homotopy equivalent to a triangulated
manifold M 4 (since the 3-dimensional Poincaré Conjecture is not known).
However, it follows from Casson’s work on the Casson invariant that this is
also not the case. Indeed, the link of any vertex in a triangulation of M 4
must be a homotopy 3-sphere (and at least one such link must be a fake
3-sphere since the triangulation cannot be P L). One can then arrange that
the connected sum of all fake 3-spheres which arise as links bounds a P L
submanifold of M 4 of signature 8. This implies that the Casson invariant
of such a fake 3-sphere must be an odd integer. On the other hand, Casson
showed that the Casson invariant of homology 3-sphere depends only on its
fundamental group. Hence, this integer is 0. This contradiction shows that
M 4 is not triangulable.
    The hyperbolization technique of the previous section allows us to pro-
mote this result to aspherical 4-manifolds. Consider h(Λ4 ), the result of
applying Gromov’s oriented hyperbolization procedure to Λ4 . It is a poly-
hedral homology manifold with only one non-manifold point (namely, the
hyperbolization of the cone point). By property 8) of the previous section,
its Stiefel-Whitney classes vanish. Since the complement of a regular neigh-
borhood of the cone point is oriented cobordant rel ∂N to N 4 and since the
signature is an oriented cobordism invariant, it follows that the signature of
h(Λ4 ) is 8. Now let M 4 denote the result of replacing the regular neighbor-

                                     26
hood of the cone point in h(Λ4 ) by the contractible manifold N 0 . Since M 4
is homotopy equivalent to h(Λ4 ), it is aspherical. The previous arguments
now prove the following result of [10].

Theorem 16.2. There is an aspherical 4-manifold M 4 which is not homo-
topy equivalent to any triangulable 4-manifold.

   In particular, M 4 is not homotopy equivalent to a P L manifold. Standard
arguments show that this property is preserved when we take the product
with a k-torus; hence, we also have the following result of [10].

Theorem 16.3. For each n ≥ 4, there is a closed aspherical n-manifold
which is not homotopy equivalent to a P L manifold.

Remark 16.4. For another application of this orientable hyperbolization pro-
cedure, see [25].


17     Relative hyperbolization
As is explained elsewhere in this volume, Farrell and Jones have proved
the Assembly Map Conjecture (cf. Section 11) for the fundamental group
of any nonpositively curved, closed Riemannian manifold. It seems likely
(or at least plausible) that the Farrell-Jones program can be adapted to
prove the Assembly Map Conjecture for the fundamental group of any closed
P L manifold M n equipped with a nonpositively curved, piecewise Euclidean
metric (cf. Section 6). (Here we want to assume that the piecewise Euclidean
structure on M n is compatible with its structure of a PL manifold. The
reason for this hypothesis is that a theorem of [10] then asserts that the
compactification of its universal cover is homeomorphic to an n-disk.)
    In this section we describe a variant of the reflection group trick (it is
also a variant of hyperbolization) which can be used to prove the following
result.

Theorem 17.1. Suppose that the Assembly Map Conjecture is true for the
fundamental group of any closed P L manifold with a nonpositively curved,
piecewise Euclidean metric. Then it is also true for the fundamental group of
any finite polyhedron with a nonpositively curved, piecewise Euclidean metric.



                                     27
    This program has been partially carried out by B. Hu in [18] and [19]. Hu
[18] first showed that the Farrell–Jones arguments work to prove the vanish-
ing the Whitehead group of the fundamental group of any closed P L manifold
with a nonpositively curved, polyhedral metric. He then used a construction
similar to the one described below to derive the following theorem.

Theorem 17.2. (Hu [18]) For any finite polyhedron with a nonpositively
curved piecewise Euclidean metric, the Whitehead group of its fundamental
group vanishes.

    As Farrell [13] pointed out in his lectures, Hu [19, p. 146] also observed
that the Farrell–Hsiang [14] proof of the Novikov Conjecture [14] works for
closed P L manifolds with nonpositively curved polyhedral metrics. (This
uses the fact that the compactification of its universal cover is homeomorphic
to a disk.) Hence, the construction described below yields the following
theorem.

Theorem 17.3. (Hu [19]) The Novikov Conjecture holds for the fundamental
group of any finite polyhedron with a nonpositively curved piecewise Euclidean
metric.

    Suppose B is a cell complex equipped with a piecewise Euclidean met-
ric. Subdividing if necessary, we may assume that B is a simplicial complex.
Suppose further that B is a subcomplex of another simplicial complex X.
Possibly after another subdivision, we may assume that B is a full subcom-
plex of X. This means that if a simplex σ of X has nonempty intersection
with B, then the intersection is a simplex of B (and a face of σ). We note
that while each simplex of B is given a Euclidean metric, no metric is as-
sumed on the simplices of X which are not in B. In practice, X will be a
P L manifold.
    We will define a new cell complex D(X, B) equipped with a polyhe-
dral metric. We will also define a finite-sheeted covering space D̃(X, B)
of D(X, B). Each cell of D(X, B) (or of D̃(X, B)) will have the form α×
[-1,1]k , for some integer k ≥ 0, where α is a simplex of B and where α×[-1,1]k
is equipped with the product metric. (Usually we will use α to stand for a
simplex of B and σ for a simplex in X which is not in B.) Define dim(X, B)
to be the maximum dimension of any simplex of X which intersects B but
which is not contained in B. Here are some properties which the construction
will have:

                                      28
    i) For n = dim(X, B), there will be 2n disjoint copies of B in
      D(X, B).

    ii) For each such copy and for each vertex v in B, the link of v
      in D(X, B) will be isomorphic to a subdivision of Lk(v, X). In
      particular, if X is a manifold, then D(X, B) will be a manifold.

    iii) If the metric on B is nonpositively curved, then the metric on
      D(X, B) will be nonpositively curved and each copy of B will be
      a totally geodesic subspace of D(X, B).

    iv) The group (Z/2)n will act as a reflection group on D(X, B). A
     fundamental chamber for this action will be denoted by K(X, B).
     It will be homeomorphic to a regular neighborhood of B in X.
     Thus, K(X, B) will be a retract of D(X, B) and B will be a
     deformation retract of K(X, B).

     In fact, the entire construction depends only on a regular neighborhood
of B in X. More precisely, it depends only on the set of simplices of X which
intersect B.
     Let P denote the poset of simplices σ in X such that σ ∩ B 6= ∅ and such
that σ is not a simplex of B. For each simplex α of B, let P>α denote the
subposet of P consisting of all σ which have α as a face. Let F =Flag(P)
denote the poset of chains in P (an element of F is a nonempty, finite, totally
ordered subset of P).
     Given a chain f = {σ0 < · · · < σk } ∈ F, let σf denote its least element,
i.e., σf = σ0 . Given a simplex α of B, let F>{α} denote the set of chains f
with σf > α.
     We begin by defining the fundamental chamber K (= K(X, B)). Each
cell of K will have the form α× [0,1]f , for some f ∈ F>{α} . Thus, the number
of interval factors of α×[0,1]f is the number of elements of f . If f ≤ f 0 , then
                                            0
we identify [0,1]f with the face of [0,1]f defined by setting the coordinates
xσ = 1, for all σ ∈ f 0 − f .
     We define an incidence relation on the set of such cells as follows: α×[0,1]f
              0
≤ α0 ×[0,1]f if and only if α ≤ α0 and f ≤ f 0 . (Notice that if α ≤ α0 , then
F>{α0 } ⊂ F>{α}  `.) K isf defined to be the cell complex formed from the
disjoint union      α×[0,1] by gluing together two such cells whenever they
are incident. It is clear that K is homeomorphic to a regular neighborhood
of B in X.

                                       29
   Next we define the mirrors of K. For each σ ∈ P>α and for each chain f
with σf = σ define δσ (α×[0,1]f ) to be the face of α×[0,1]f defined by setting
xσ = 0, i.e.,
                    δσ (α × [0,1]f ) = α × 0 × [0,1]f −{σ} .
The mirror δσ K is the subcomplex of K consisting of all such cells. In other
words, δσ K = α × Sσ , where α = B ∩ σ and where Sσ denotes the star of the
barycenter of σ in the simplicial complex F (=Flag(P)).
   Next we apply the reflection group trick. Set J = (Z/2)P . Define D̃
(= D̃(X, B)) by
                              D̃ = (J × K)/ ∼
where the equivalence relation ∼ is defined as in Section 7.
Remark 17.4. Suppose X is the cone on a simplicial complex ∂X and that
B is the cone point. Then D̃(X, B) coincides with the cubical complex PL
defined in Section 3 (where L is the barycentric subdivision of ∂X).
    The definition of the space D (= D(X, B)) is similar to that of D̃ only one
uses the smaller group (Z/2)n , n = dim(X, B), instead of J. If {r1 , . . . , rn } is
the standard set of generators for (Z/2)n , then we identify the points (gri , x)
and (g, x) whenever x belongs to a mirror δσ K with i = dim σ.
    There is another definition of D(X, B) which is similar to the definitions
of the hyperbolization constructions given in the previous two sections. We
shall define a space D(k) (X, B) for any pair (X, B) with dim(X, B) ≤ k. The
definition is by induction on dim(X, B). First of all, D(0) (X, B) is defined to
be B. Assume that D(n−1) has been defined and that dim(X, B) = n. Set

           D(n) (X (n−1) ∪ B, B) = D(n−1) (X (n−1) ∪ B, B) × {−1, 1}.

If σ is an n-simplex such that σ ∩ B 6= ∅ and σ is not in B, then define

                D(n) (σ, σ ∩ B) = D(n−1) (∂σ, ∂σ ∩ B) × [−1, 1].

We note that the boundary of D(n) (σ, σ ∩ B) is naturally a subcomplex
of D(n) (X (n−1) ∪ B, B). Hence, we can glue in each hyperbolized simplex
D(n) (σ, σ ∩ B) to obtain D(n) (X, B) = D(X, B).
     The advantage of this definition is that it makes it easier to prove property
iii) (that if B is nonpositively curved, then so is D(X, B).) The proof is
based on a Gluing Lemma of Reshetnyak [3, p. 316] or [16, p. 124]. This
lemma asserts that if we glue together two nonpositively curved spaces via

                                         30
an isometry of a common totally geodesic subspace, then the new metric
space is nonpositively curved. The inductive hypothesis gives that the spaces
D(n−1) (X (n−1) ∪B, B) and D(n−1) (∂σ, ∂σ∩B) are nonpositively curved. Using
the Gluing Lemma, we get that D(n) (X, B) is also nonpositively curved.
Remark 17.5. The above construction of D(X, B) was explained to me about
eight years ago by Lowell Jones. It is a variation of the “cross with interval”
hyperbolization procedure which had been described previously by Tadeusz
Januszkiewicz and me in [10]. Relative versions of this were described by Hu
[19] and by Ruth Charney and me in [4]. In these earlier versions of relative
hyperbolization the 1-skeleton of X was not changed. Jones realized that the
construction is nicer if, as in this section, we also hyperbolize the 1-simplices.


18      Comments on the references
My first work on the complexes PL and ΣL was in my paper [5] on reflec-
tion groups. This paper was inspired by lectures of Thurston on Andreev’s
Theorem. This theorem concerned the realization of convex polytopes in
hyperbolic 3-space with prescribed dihedral angles, thereby producing many
examples of reflection groups on hyperbolic 3-space. (Andreev’s Theorem
provided the first large class of manifolds for which Thurston’s Geometriza-
tion Conjecture was verified.) In the right-angled case, one of Andreev’s con-
ditions was the flag complex condition of Section 5. Thurston’s explanation
of the relationship of this condition to the asphericity of the corresponding
3-manifolds led me to guess (and then prove in [5]) that a similar result held
in all dimensions.
    In [5], I defined the complexes PL and ΣL as in Section 7, I gave the exam-
ples in Section 9 of aspherical manifolds not covered by Euclidean space and
I discussed the reflection group trick. In [6], a version of Theorem 11.4 ap-
peared for the first time. (However, since I was using [(X, ∂X), (G/T OP, ∗)]
instead of Hn (X; L), I only made a statement about the injectivity of the
assembly map.)
    Subsequently, in a seminal paper, Gromov [16] described the cubical struc-
ture on PL and proved that the resulting piecewise Euclidean metric was
nonpositively curved. (For an exposition of Gromov’s ideas on nonpositive
curvature, the reader is referred to the excellent book of Bridson and Hae-
fliger [2] as well as to the new textbook [3].) In the same paper Gromov
introduced the hyperbolization techniques, described in Sections 14 and 15,

                                       31
for producing nonpositively curved polyhedra. (At least in the case of the
Möbius band procedure, he also claimed that the hyperbolized space admit-
ted a metric of strict negative curvature. This stronger assertion was in error,
but later Charney and I in [4] showed how Gromov’s constructions could be
modified so that it would be true.)
    In [10] Januszkiewicz and I used Gromov’s hyperbolization construction
to produce the example in Section 16 of a nontriangulable aspherical 4-
manifold.
    I have written three other survey papers [7], [8] and [12] which the reader
is referred to for further details on the material discussed here.


References
[1]   G. Baumslag, E. Dyer, A. Heller, The topology of discrete groups, J. of
      Pure and Applied Algebra 16 (1980), 1–47.

[2]   M. Bridson and A. Haefliger, Metric Spaces of Nonpositive Curvature,
      Springer–Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg and New York, 1999.

[3]   D. Burago, Y. Burago and S. Ivanov, A Course in Metric Geometry,
      Grad. Studies in Math. 33, American Math. Society, Providence, 2001.

[4]   R. Charney and M.W. Davis, Strict hyperbolization, Topology 34
      (1995), 329–350.

[5]   M.W. Davis, Groups generated by reflections and aspherical manifolds
      not covered by Euclidean space, Ann. of Math. (2) 117(1983), 293–325.

[6]   M.W. Davis, Coxeter groups and aspherical manifolds Algebraic Topol-
      ogy Aarhus 1982, Lecture Notes in Math. 1051, Springer–Verlag,
      Berlin, Heidelberg and New York, 1984, pp. 197–221.

[7]   M.W. Davis, Poincaré duality groups, Surveys in Surgery Theory, Vol.
      1 (eds. S. Cappell, A. Ranicki, J. Rosenberg), Annals of Math. Studies
      145, Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, 2000, pp. 167–193.

[8]   M.W. Davis, Nonpositive curvature and reflection groups, Handbook
      of Geometric Topology (eds. R. Daverman and R. Sher), Elsevier, Am-
      sterdam, 2001.


                                      32
[9]    M.W. Davis and J-C. Hausmann, Aspherical manifolds without smooth
       or PL structures, Algebraic Topology, Lecture Notes in Math. 1370,
       Springer–Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg and New York, 1989, pp. 135–142.

[10]   M.W. Davis and T. Januszkiewicz, Hyperbolization of polyhedra, J.
       Differential Geometry 34 (1991), 347–388.

[11]   M.W. Davis, T. Januszkiewicz and R. Scott, Nonpositive curvature of
       blow-ups, Selecta. Math. (N.S.) 4 (1998), 491–547.

[12]   M.W. Davis and G. Moussong, Notes on nonpositively curved polyhe-
       dra, Low Dimensional Topology (eds. K. Boroczsky, W. Neumann, A.
       Stipicz), Bolyai Soc. Math. Studies 8, Budapest, 1999, pp. 11–94.

[13]   F.T. Farrell, this volume.

[14]   F.T. Farrell and W.C. Hsiang, On Novikov’s Conjecture for nonposi-
       tively curved manifolds, Ann. of Math. (2) 113 (1981), 199–209.

[15]   M. Freedman, The topology of four–dimensional manifolds, J. Differ-
       ential Geometry 17 (1982), 357–453.

[16]   M. Gromov, Hyperbolic groups, Essays in Group Theory (ed. S.M. Ger-
       sten) M.S.R.I. Publ. 8 Springer–Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg and New
       York, 1987.

[17]   J-C. Hausmann, On the homotopy of non-nilpotent spaces, Math. Z.
       178 (1981), 115–123.

[18]   B. Hu, Whitehead groups of finite polyhedra with nonpositive curvature,
       J. Differential Geometry 38 (1993), 501–517.

[19]   B. Hu, Retractions of closed manifolds with nonpositive curvature, Ge-
       ometric Group Theory (eds. R. Charney, M.W. Davis, M. Shapiro),
       Ohio State Univ. Math. Research Inst. Publ. 3, de Gruyter, Berlin and
       New York, 1995, pp. 135–148.

[20]   R. Lyndon and P. Schupp, Combinatorial Group Theory, Springer–
       Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg and New York, 1978.

[21]   G. Mess, Examples of Poincaré duality groups, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.
       110 (1990), 1145–1146.

                                      33
[22]   C.F. Miller, Decision problems for groups — survey and reflections,
       Algorithms and Classification in Combinatorial Group Theory (eds.
       G. Baumslag, C.F. Miller) M.S.R.I. Publ. 23 Springer–Verlag, Berlin,
       Heidelberg and New York, 1991, pp. 1–60.

[23]   M.S. Raghunathan, Torsion in cocompact lattices in coverings of
       Spin(2, n), Math. Ann. 226 (1984), 403–419.

[24]   V.A. Rohlin, A new result in the theory of 4-dimensional manifolds,
       Soviet Math. Doklady 8 (1952), 221–224 (in Russian).

[25]   R. Roy, A counterexample to questions on the integrality property of
       virtual signatures, Topology Appl. 100 (2000),177–185

[26]   J.R. Stallings, The piecewise–linear structure of Euclidean space, Proc.
       Cambridge Phil. Soc. 58 (1962), 481–488.




                                      34
