                                            OUTER AUTOMORPHISM GROUPS OF HYPERBOLIC GROUPS, BOUNDED
                                                   EXTENSIONS, AND HIERARCHICAL HYPERBOLICITY


                                                                      ERVIN HADŽIOSMANOVIĆ AND GIORGIO MANGIONI


                                                   Abstract. We prove that the outer automorphism group of a one-ended hyperbolic group is virtually
                                                   a hierarchically hyperbolic group (HHG), under mild orientability conditions on the associated JSJ




arXiv:2605.23829v2 [math.GR] 25 Jun 2026
                                                   decomposition. This is done by proving that a finite-index subgroup is a central extension of a
                                                   product of orbifold mapping class groups, and the extension has bounded Euler class. Our theorem
                                                   is sharp: we exhibit a surface amalgam whose fundamental group has full outer automorphism group
                                                   which is not a HHG.



                                                                                                               This terminology should not be blamed on
                                                                                                               me. It was obtained by a democratic
                                                                                                               process in my course of 1976–77. An
                                                                                                               orbifold is something with many folds;
                                                                                                               unfortunately, the word “manifold” already
                                                                                                               has a different definition. I tried
                                                                                                               “foldamani”, which was quickly displaced
                                                                                                               by the suggestion of “manifolded”. After
                                                                                                               two months of patiently saying “no, not a
                                                                                                               manifold, a manifolded,” we held a vote,
                                                                                                               and “orbifold” won.

                                                                                                                      William Thurston, The geometry and
                                                                                                                               topology of three-manifolds


                                                                                           Introduction
                                              Outer automorphism groups of hyperbolic groups are of utmost importance in combinatorial and
                                           geometric group theory. One of the many reasons is that this class includes both Out pFn q and map-
                                           ping class groups of closed surfaces, which are ubiquitous in the study of low-dimensional topology.
                                           Furthermore, a key step in the solution of the isomorphism problem for hyperbolic groups (see, among
                                           others, [RS94, Sel97, DG11]) was a description of the outer automorphism group of a one-ended hyper-
                                           bolic group G in terms of certain virtually Abelian extensions of mapping class groups. We improve
                                           this description by showing that Out pGq is virtually a bounded central extension:
                                           Theorem A (See Theorem 2.6). Let G be a one-ended hyperbolic group. Then Out pGq is virtually a
                                           direct product Zq ˆ M , where q ě 0 and M fits inside a bounded central extension
                                                                                           ź
                                                                           1 Ñ Zs Ñ M Ñ        PMCG pGv q Ñ 1.
                                           Here Zs is finitely generated Abelian, the product has finitely many factors, and each PMCG pGv q is a
                                           finite extension of a finite-index subgroup of the mapping class group of a hyperbolic orbifold without
                                           mirrors.
                                           Let us briefly explain the above terminology. We say that a group G is a finite extension of a group
                                           H if G surjects onto H with finite kernel. Furthermore, a central extension 1 Ñ K Ñ G Ñ H Ñ 1 is
                                           bounded if the associated Euler class rGs P H 2 pH, Kq is represented by a cocycle ω : H ˆH Ñ K taking
                                           bounded values; see Proposition 1.6 for an equivalent characterisation in terms of quasimorphisms.
                                           Finally, we refer to Section 1.2 below for more details on orbifolds. For experts, the product is over all
                                                                                                   1
2                                E. HADŽIOSMANOVIĆ AND G. MANGIONI


quadratically hanging subgroups Gv appearing in the JSJ tree of cylinders over the class Z of virtually
Z subgroups with infinite center: see Section 1.4 and the outline below.
   If we further assume that G is torsion-free, then all orbifolds are genuine surfaces, and all finite
extensions are trivial. Hence in this case Theorem A has a simpler form:
Corollary B. Let G be a one-ended, torsion-free hyperbolic group. Then Out pGq is virtually a bounded
central extension of a direct product of mapping class groups of (possibly non-orientable) hyperbolic
surfaces.
While the existence of the central extension from Theorem A follows from a careful inspection of
several, often implicit, results in the literature (see, among others, [Sel97, Bow98, Lev05, DG11]), the
fact that the extension is bounded is new. To the eye of a geometric group theorist, one of the main
consequences of boundedness is that the extension is quasi-isometrically trivial, meaning that it is
quasi-isometric to the direct product of the kernel and the quotient [Ger92]. In the case where all
orbifolds appearing in Theorem A are orientable, we can dramatically improve our understanding of
the coarse geometry of Out pGq:
Theorem C (See Theorem 2.11). Let G be a one-ended hyperbolic group, and let Z be the family of its
virtually Z subgroups with infinite centre. Suppose that all quadratically hanging subgroups appearing in
the Z-JSJ tree of cylinders of G are orientation-preserving. Then Out pGq is virtually a hierarchically
hyperbolic group.
Hierarchically hyperbolic groups (HHGs), as first introduced in [BHS17b], provide a common framework
for mapping class group of surfaces, most cubulated groups, most 3-manifold groups, and more. As
such, techniques from low-dimensional topology and the world of CAT(0) cube complexes can be
exploited to prove a plethora of properties of (virtual) HHGs; a very non-exhaustive list includes
results on their asymptotic dimension [BHS17a], quasiflats [BHS21], and on being quasi-isometric to
CAT(0) cube complexes [Pet24].
   We emphasise that the splitting from Theorem A can be trivial: this happens precisely when G is
itself a finite extension of an orientation-preserving, cocompact Fuchsian group of conical type (that is,
the fundamental group of a closed, orientable, hyperbolic 2-orbifold). In this case Out pGq is genuinely
hierarchically hyperbolic, without need to pass to a finite-index subgroup:
Theorem D (See Theorem 2.10). Let G be a finite extension of an orientation-preserving, cocompact
Fuchsian group of conical type. Then Out pGq is a hierarchically hyperbolic group.
As the full Out pGq is quasi-isometric to its finite-index HHG subgroup, it has the structure of a hierar-
chically hyperbolic space, the non-equivariant analogue of a HHG. Unfortunately, being a hierarchically
hyperbolic group might not pass to finite-index overgroups: in other words, there might not be any
equivariant structure (see [PS23, Corollary 4.5] for an explicit counterexample). This is indeed the
case in our setting, even under the assumption that G has no torsion. For a concrete counterexample,
let Σ “ S11 be a torus with one open disk removed, and let K be the 2-complex obtained by gluing
three copies Σ1 , Σ2 , Σ3 along the boundary circle C, as in Figure 1.
Theorem E (See Theorem 3.14). π1 pKq is torsion-free and satisfies the assumptions of Theorem C,
but Out pπ1 pKqq is not a HHG.

Outline of sections and arguments.
JSJ decompositions. The main tool for the study of outer automorphism groups of hyperbolic groups,
which also played a central role in the solution of the isomorphism problem for hyperbolic groups,
is Bowditch’s JSJ decomposition over virtually cyclic subgroups [Bow98]. This is a graph-of-groups
decomposition of a one-ended hyperbolic group with virtually cyclic edge groups, and whose vertex
groups are either:
     ‚ maximal virtually cyclic subgroups;
     ‚ “rigid” quasiconvex subgroups, which cannot be split further relative to the edge groups;
                  OUTER AUTOMORPHISM GROUPS, BOUNDED EXTENSIONS, AND HHG                                3




        Figure 1. Depiction of the complex K, obtained by gluing three tori with one bound-
        ary to a common circle (here, the dashed line) along the boundaries. The cyclic per-
        mutation of the three surfaces descends to an order-three element σ of Out pπ1 pKqq.


     ‚ or quadratically hanging subgroups, which are (finite extensions of) fundamental groups of
       hyperbolic orbifolds.
The decomposition is invariant under automorphisms of G, in a suitable sense, and this makes it
possible to study automorphisms of G by their action on the vertex groups.
    We do not directly use Bowditch’s decomposition; instead, following [DG11], we manipulate it to get
another canonical decomposition, the Z-JSJ tree of cylinders. The new splitting has all properties of
Bowditch’s decomposition, and the advantage that quadratically hanging subgroups are now extensions
of fundamental groups of hyperbolic orbifolds without mirrors, i.e. which don’t contain reflections along
lines of H2 . This is relevant as mapping class groups of such orbifolds are finite-index subgroups of
mapping class groups of surfaces, and this is the key fact underlying the proof of Theorem C.
    In order to uniformise the notation among the numerous references on the subject, we did an exten-
sive literature review which we then condensed in Section 1. There the reader will find all the relevant
background material on (bounded) central extensions, orbifolds, their mapping class groups, and JSJ
decompositions of hyperbolic groups. While we do not claim any completeness of our exposition, as
we omitted several facts that we do not need in this paper, we still hope it might serve as a gentle,
self-contained entry point for the reader interested in any of the above topics.

(Virtual) bounded central extensions. Section 2 contains the virtual description of the outer auto-
morphism group as a bounded central extension of a product of mapping class groups, which proves
Theorem A. Though a sizeable part of what we show is implicit in work of Levitt [Lev05], the proof
of boundedness is new, and relies on a careful analysis of the analogue of the capping extension for
orbifold mapping class groups.
    We now illustrate the general idea with a simple example. Take the complex K depicted in Figure 1
and let G be its fundamental group. By an analogue of the Dehn-Nielsen-Baer Theorem [Laf07,
Theorem 1.2], automorphisms of G are realised by self-homeomorphisms of K; hence restricting a
homeomorphism to (the interior of) each Σi gives an epimorphism ρ : Out    Ą pGq Ñ ś3 MCG pS1,1 q,
                                                                                        i“1
where Out Ą pGq is the finite-index subgroup of Out pGq mapping each torus to itself in an orientation-
preserving way, and S1,1 is a torus with one puncture. The kernel of ρ is generated by the Dehn twists
T1 , T2 , T3 around the boundaries of the Σi ’s; these elements span a subgroup isomorphic to Z2 as the
product T1 T2 T3 induces the conjugation by the core curve of C on G. Since homeomorphisms of K
fix C up to homotopy, Dehn twists are central in Out  Ą pGq, so we get a central extension
                                                     3
                                                     ź
                              1 Ñ Z2 Ñ Ą
                                       Out pGq Ñ           MCG pS1,1 q Ñ 1.
                                                     i“1
4                                E. HADŽIOSMANOVIĆ AND G. MANGIONI


The boundedness of the above extension reduces to the boundedness of the classical capping extension
                                             ` ˘
                           1 Ñ xT y Ñ MCG S11 Ñ MCG pS1,1 q Ñ 1,
where again the map on the right is the restriction
                                            ` ˘       to the interior; in turn, this follows from the
existence of a certain quasimorphism MCG S11 Ñ xT y – Z, obtained from the action on the annular
curve graph of the boundary [MM00, Section 2.4].
   We stress that the capping extension can be shown to be bounded by other means: for instance,
one could combine the boundedness of the classical Euler class [Fri17, Sections 10.2, 10.3] with the
results in [FM12, Section 5.5]. Such an argument could likely be extended to general orbifolds, but we
preferred to use quasimorphism, as our techniques are more elementary.
Hierarchical hyperbolicity. Very roughly, a hierarchically hyperbolic group is a finitely generated group
admitting suitable “coordinate projections” to a collection of Gromov-hyperbolic spaces: see Defini-
tion 3.1 and Definition 3.2 below. The motivating example is the mapping class group of a finite-type,
orientable surface, which projects to the curve graphs of its subsurfaces via subsurface projection. Com-
bining this with the fact that bounded central extensions of HHGs are themselves HHGs [FFMS26,
Theorem 1.3], in Section 2.2 we deduce Theorem C from Theorem A. In the case where G is itself a
finite extension of a cocompact Fuchsian group of conical type, the same techniques describe Out pGq as
a finite extension of a finite-index subgroup of a mapping class group, thus proving Theorem D without
the need to pass to a finite-index subgroup. We strived to make Section 2.2 as clear as possible for
the reader who is not an expert on HHG: the only prerequisites we need are given as self-contained
blackboxes, while a comprehensive background on HHGs is postponed to Section 3.1.
The counterexample. Finally, in Section 3.2 we construct the counterexample, thus proving Theorem E.
Very roughly, assuming that Out pπ1 pKqq is a HHG, we show that the p3, 3, 3q triangle group Z2 ¸ S3 ď
Out pπ1 pKqq, generated by Dehn twists around the boundaries of the Σi ’s and the homeomorphisms
permuting the three tori, is hierarchically quasiconvex, the suitable notion of quasiconvexity in the
hierarchical world. In analogy with quasiconvex subgroups in other non-positively curved groups,
hierarchically quasiconvex subgroups inherit some of the geometric structure of the ambient group;
we use this to deduce a contradiction, mimicking an argument of Petyt-Spriano who proved that the
p3, 3, 3q triangle group carries no HHG structure (see [PS23, Corollary 4.5]).
   The proof of Theorem E relies on the technical Corollary 3.12. For HHG experts, the latter states
that an Abelian subgroup A of maximal rank in a HHG coincides with a standard flat. The first version
of this paper deduced this fact from the Quasiflat theorem [BHS21, Theorem A], using that the cocom-
pact action of A onto itself forbids the presence of “singular points” in the quasiflat. Later, Pénélope
Azuelos pointed out to us that the result is actually a straightforward consequence of [HRSS25, Proposi-
tion 2.17]. We therefore decided to shorten our argument, and we refer anyone who might be interested
in the original tools to the first ArXiv version of this article.
Questions. As explained in Remark 2.12, we could remove the orientability assumption in Theo-
rem C, and therefore prove virtual hierarchical hyperbolicity for outer automorphism of all one-ended
hyperbolic groups, if the following question had a positive answer:
Question F. Let O be a non-orientable, hyperbolic orbifold without mirrors. Is the mapping class
group of O a hierarchically hyperbolic group?
As pointed out in Lemma 1.23, MCG pOq has finite index in the mapping class group of the surface
obtained by removing the cone points. Since being a hierarchically hyperbolic group passes to finite-
index subgroups, it would be enough to answer the following:
Question G. Is the mapping class group of a non-orientable surface, possibly with punctures and
boundaries, a hierarchically hyperbolic group?
To the best of our knowledge, this is unknown even for closed non-orientable surfaces.
   A positive answer to Question G would follow from a more general result about centralisers in HHGs.
Indeed, let N be a non-orientable surface, let S be its orientable double cover, and let J : S Ñ S be
                  OUTER AUTOMORPHISM GROUPS, BOUNDED EXTENSIONS, AND HHG                               5


the order-two deck transformation. By combining results of [BC72, HT09, LGGM18, KK24] one gets
that, except in a few sporadic cases, MCG pN q embeds in MCG˘ pSq as the subgroup of orientation-
preserving mapping classes that commute with J (see Theorem 1.24 below). So we ask:
Question H. Let G be a HHG, and let F ď G be a finite subgroup. Is the centraliser of F a HHG?
The above is motivated by the principle that centralisers in non-positively curved groups should inherit
the geometric properties of the ambient group: for example, centralisers in hyperbolic groups are
quasiconvex, hence hyperbolic (see e.g. [BH99, Proposition III.Γ.3.9]), and centralisers in CAT(0)
groups are themselves CAT(0) [Rua01]. The analogue of Question H for centralisers of virtually
Abelian subgroup will be considered in forthcoming work of Azuelos and Hagen [AH].
Acknowledgements. We thank Alessandro Sisto for hosting EH during his research stay at the
Maxwell Institute in Edinburgh, where this work was written, for asking the questions we answer,
and for several insightful comments and suggestions. We are grateful to Pénélope Azuelos and Mark
Hagen for numerous exchanges, and for suggesting how to shorten the proof of the counterexample.
Many thanks to Alex Wright for sharing his ideas on how to tackle Question H. We also acknowledge
Gilbert Levitt for enlightening discussion on the technicalities hidden in defining mapping class groups
for orbifolds. Finally, the first author was partially supported by the GNSAGA group of INdAM.

                                           1. Background
1.1. Bounded central extensions. Here we gather generalities on (bounded) central extensions,
and recall a characterisation of boundedness in terms of quasihomomorphisms: see Proposition 1.6.
Definition 1.1. Given a central extension 1 Ñ K Ñ E Ñ G Ñ 1 with finitely generated kernel, let
σ : G Ñ E be a set-theoretic section. The map ωpg, hq “ σpgqσphqσpghq´1 P K is a 2-cocycle, i.e. for
all g1 , g2 , g3 P G
                          ωpg2 , g3 q ´ ωpg1 g2 , g3 q ` ωpg1 , g2 g3 q ´ ωpg1 , g2 q “ 0.
Hence ω defines a class in H 2 pG; Kq, called the Euler class of the extension, which is independent of
the choice of σ and we denote by rEs. We say the extension is bounded if rEs is bounded, meaning
that there exists a 2-cocycle α : G2 Ñ K such that rαs “ rEs and α takes finitely many values.
Bounded extensions are quasi-isometrically trivial, in the following sense:
Theorem 1.2 ([Ger92]). Let 1 Ñ K Ñ E Ñ G Ñ 1 be a bounded central extension. Then E is
quasi-isometric to the direct product K ˆ G.
Definition 1.3. Let pK, } ¨ }q be a normed Abelian group, and let E be another group. A map
χ : E Ñ K is a quasihomomorphism if there exists Dpχq ě 0, called the defect of χ, such that, for
every e1 , e2 P E,
                                }χpe1 q ` χpe2 q ´ χpe1 e2 q} ď Dpχq.
When K “ Z or R with the Euclidean norm, we say quasimorphism instead of quasihomomorphism.
A quasihomomorphism is homogeneous if it restricts to a homomorphism on every cyclic subgroup.
It is clear that a bounded modification of a quasihomomorphism is itself a quasihomomorphism, pos-
sibly with a larger defect. We shall often use this fact without mentioning it.
                                                                                          k
Remark 1.4. Given any quasihomomorphism ϕ : E Ñ Rn , the map ψpeq “ limkÑ8 ϕpek q , called the
homogeneisation of ϕ, is a homogeneous quasihomomorphism within finite distance from ϕ (see e.g.
[Cal09, Lemma 2.21]). Notice that a homogeneous quasimorphism ψ coincides with its homogeneisa-
tion, and is therefore invariant under conjugation: given g, h P E,
                                   ψpghk g ´1 q       ψpgq ` ψphk q ` ψpg ´1 q
                 ψpghg ´1 q “ lim               “ lim                          “ ψphq,
                            kÑ8          k        kÑ8           k
where we used that ψpghk g ´1 q differs from the sum of the ψ-images by at most 2Dpψq.
Natural examples of quasimorphisms arise from actions on quasilines:
6                                   E. HADŽIOSMANOVIĆ AND G. MANGIONI


Example 1.5 (Busemann quasimorphism, see e.g. [Man08, Section 4.1]). Let E be a group acting on
a quasiline X, i.e. a space quasi-isometric to R. Suppose the action does not swap the ideal endpoints.
Given a sequence txn u P X converging to an ideal endpoint p, let ϕtxu : E Ñ R be defined as
                                   ϕtxu pgq “ lim sup dpgx0 , xn q ´ dpx0 , xn q,
                                                  nÑ8
                             k
                        ϕ   pg q
and let ϕpgq “ limkÑ8 txuk . One can show that the limit exists, does not depend on the choice of
the sequence, and gives a homogeneous quasimorphism ϕ : E Ñ R which is non-trivial on g if and only
if g acts loxodromically on X.
We recall the following equivalent characterisation of boundedness for central extensions, which is very
useful for applications: see [FFMS26, Proposition 2.9] and, independently, [TW25, Lemma 5.6].
                                              π
Proposition 1.6. Let 1 Ñ K Ñ E Ý   Ñ G Ñ 1 be a central extension with finitely generated kernel.
The following are equivalent:
   (1) rEs is bounded.
   (2) There exists a quasihomomorphism χ : E Ñ K such that χ|K is the identity.
We give some easy applications of the above criterion, which are surely known to experts via other
means. The first regards products of central extensions:
Corollary 1.7. For i “ 1, 2 let 1 Ñ Ki Ñ Ei Ñ Gi Ñ 1 be bounded central extensions with finitely
generated kernels. Then the direct product 1 Ñ K1 ˆ K2 Ñ E1 ˆ E2 Ñ G1 ˆ G2 Ñ 1 is a bounded
central extension.
Proof. If for i “ 1, 2 we choose a quasimorphism ψi : Ei Ñ Ki which is the identity on Ki , then
ψ1 ˆ ψ2 : E1 ˆ E2 Ñ K1 ˆ K2 is a quasihomomorphism which is the identity on K1 ˆ K2 .         □
The second consequence regards sub-extensions:
                                          π
Corollary 1.8. Let 1 Ñ K Ñ E Ý      Ñ G Ñ 1 be bounded central extensions with finitely generated
kernel, and let E 1 ď E. Then the central extension 1 Ñ K X E 1 Ñ E 1 Ñ πpE 1 q Ñ 1 is bounded.
Proof. Let ψ : E Ñ K be a quasihomomorphism which is the identity on K. The restriction ψ|E 1 : E 1 Ñ
K is a quasihomomorphism which is the identity on K X E 1 . Since K is an abelian group, we can then
find a quasihomomorphism ξ : K Ñ K X E 1 which is the identity on K X E 1 . Hence the composition
ξ ˝ ψ|E 1 : E 1 Ñ E 1 X K is a quasihomomorphism which is the identity on K X E 1 , proving that the
extension is bounded.                                                                               □
The last consequence was already pointed out in [FFMS26, Corollary 2.10]:
Corollary 1.9. Let 1 Ñ K Ñ E Ñ G Ñ 1 be a bounded central extension with finitely generated
kernel. If L ď K, then the extension 1 Ñ K{L Ñ E{L Ñ G Ñ 1 is also bounded.
1.2. Hyperbolic orbifolds and their mapping class groups. We recall here definition and prop-
erties of hyperbolic 2-orbifolds and their mapping class groups, gathering notation and results from
across the literature for improved clarity. We refer to [MH75, Bow98, Fuj02, DG11] (among several
others) for the original treatments, and to [Mar25] for a more recent, comprehensive introduction.
1.2.1. Bounded Fuchsian groups. In what follows, let H2 be the hyperbolic plane, and let BH2 its
boundary at infinity, which is homeomorphic to a circle S1 .
Remark 1.10 (Isometries of H2 ). An isometry g P IsompH2 q is of one of 5 types. If g is orientation-
preserving, then it is either:
      ‚ elliptic if it fixes a point in H2 ;
      ‚ parabolic if it fixes exactly one point of the boundary BH2 ;
      ‚ loxodromic if it fixes exactly two ideal points of BH2 and acts as a translation along the unique
        geodesic that connects them, called the axis of g.
                   OUTER AUTOMORPHISM GROUPS, BOUNDED EXTENSIONS, AND HHG                                  7


If instead g reverses orientation, then it is either:
       ‚ a reflection along a geodesic;
       ‚ a glide-reflection along a geodesic, that is, the composition of a reflection along a geodesic and
         a loxodromic along the same geodesic.
The subgroup of IsompH2 q fixing a point is isomorphic to the orthogonal group Op2q via the action on
the boundary BH2 , seen as a circle with the standard round metric.
Definition 1.11 (Bounded Fuchsian group). A bounded Fuchsian group is a non-virtually-cyclic,
finitely generated, discrete subgroup G of IsompH2 q without parabolics. Such a group acts properly
and cocompactly on the convex hull DG of the limit points ΛpGq Ď BH2 for the action. If moreover
DG “ H2 then G is called a cocompact Fuchsian group. A bounded Fuchsian group is orientation-
preserving
Remark 1.12. The term “bounded Fuchsian group” has appeared in the literature with different
meanings. For example, in [DG11], Dahmani and Guirardel do not require the action on H2 to be
faithful, but only to have finite kernel; their bounded Fuchsian groups are therefore finite extensions
of groups satisfying Definition 1.11. Their notion is taken from Bowditch’s paper [Bow98], which
further makes a distinction between bounded Fuchsian groups and cocompact ones. Classically (see
e.g. [Kat92]) Fuchsian groups are commonly understood as subgroups of Isom` pH2 q, so we prefer to
exclude non-faithful actions. As a consequence, with our notation Fuchsian groups have no non-trivial
finite normal subgroups: see Lemma 1.13. On the other hand, we do include orientation-reversing
isometries: our cocompact Fuchsian groups are also known as non-Euclidean crystallographic groups
[Mac67]. Finally, in contrast with Bowditch’s notation, we consider cocompact Fuchsian group as
special examples of bounded ones, to simplify the notation later.
The following is well-known, but we provide a proof for completeness.
Lemma 1.13. Let G be a bounded Fuchsian group. Then G is Gromov-hyperbolic. Moreover, it has
no non-trivial finite normal subgroups, and in particular it has trivial centre.
Proof. Gromov-hyperbolicity follows from the fact that G acts properly and cocompactly on DG , which
is a convex subspace of H2 and is therefore hyperbolic. Therefore, since G is not virtually cyclic, it
admits a maximal finite normal subgroup K, which is the kernel of the action of G on ΛpGq “ BDG
(see e.g. [BJ25, Corollary 1.2], which is far more general). Now DG has more than two points at
infinity, as otherwise G would be virtually cyclic; hence every element k P K is a finite-order isometry
of H2 fixing at least three points at infinity, and is therefore trivial (this is because any finite-order
isometry fixes a point in H2 , and an element of Op2q fixing three points on the circle is trivial). Hence
G has no non-trivial finite normal subgroups; in particular, G has trivial centre, as the latter is a finite
normal subgroup (see e.g. the far more general [DGO17, Theorem 6.14.(a)]).                                □
1.2.2. Orbifold fundamental groups. We now specialise the more general definition of an orbifold to our
setting. To each bounded Fuchsian group we shall associate two orbifolds, obtained as quotients of DG
and H2 , respectively. The distinction will be relevant as the former will have boundary components
which will not appear in the latter.
Definition 1.14 (Orbifold). Let G be a bounded Fuchsian group. The associated compact orbifold
is the quotient O “ DG {G, while we denote the full quotient O1 “ H2 {G as the punctured orbifold
associated to G. The group G is called the orbifold fundamental group of both O and O1 , denoted
π1orb pOq “ π1orb pO1 q. We say that O and O1 are orientable if G is orientation-preserving.
Remark 1.15. One could define orbifolds (and their fundamental groups) in greater generality as
topological spaces locally modelled after quotients of the Euclidean space by finite subgroups of isome-
tries, without passing through the universal cover: see, e.g. [Mar25, Section 3.6].
Definition 1.16 (Singular locus). The singular locus is the image in O (resp. O1 ) of the points of H2
with non-trivial G-stabiliser. Given a point x in the singular locus, and a preimage p P H2 of x, we
say that:
8                                E. HADŽIOSMANOVIĆ AND G. MANGIONI


     ‚ x is a cone point if StabG ppq – Z{m, generated by a rotation; m is called the weight of x, and
        by construction the total angle around x is 2π{m.
     ‚ x is a mirror point if StabG ppq – Z{2, generated by a reflection.
     ‚ x is a corner reflector if StabG ppq is a dihedral group, generated by two reflections along lines
        intersecting at p.
The quotient map DG Ñ O (resp. H2 Ñ O1 ) is a branched covering, branching over the singular locus.
See Figure 2 for an example of an orbifold with cone points, and Figure 3 for an example of an orbifold
with mirrors and corner reflectors.




        Figure 2. Consider the genus two closed surface Σ2 , and choose a hyperbolic metric
        making the rotation ρ by an angle of π around the dashed axes an isometry (one can
        either explicitly construct such a metric, or invoke Nielsen’s realization theorem, see
        e.g. [FM12, Theorem 7.1]). The quotient Σ2 {xρy is a sphere with six cone points, each
        of weight 2, and indeed the total angle around each cone point is π.




        Figure 3. The above image is work of A. Sherwood, whose source can be found on
        Wikipedia. The p6, 6, 6q triangle group (that is, the Coxeter group on a triangle with
        all edge labels 6) acts on H2 by reflections along the sides of a hyperbolic triangle
        T with all angles π{6, whose translates cover the space. The quotient orbifold is
        isomorphic to T itself, and has three mirror segments intersecting at three corner
        reflectors of angles π{6. The stabiliser of any vertex v in T is a copy of the dihedral
        group D6 , generated by the reflections along the sides of T meeting at v.

Definition 1.17 (Orbifold boundary). The orbifold boundary of the compact orbifold O, denoted
BO, is the image of the boundary of DG . Given a boundary line ℓ Ă BDG , the stabiliser of ℓ in G
is isomorphic to either Z, generated by a loxodromic along ℓ, or the infinite Dihedral group D8 –
Z{2 ˚ Z{2, generated by two reflections along lines orthogonal to ℓ. Hence a boundary component C of
O is either a circle or a segment, respectively. A peripheral subgroup associated to C is the Z or D8
subgroup of π1orb pOq stabilising a line in the preimage of C; any two such subgroups are conjugate, so
with a little abuse of notation we speak of “the” peripheral subgroup associated to C.
                  OUTER AUTOMORPHISM GROUPS, BOUNDED EXTENSIONS, AND HHG                               9


Remark 1.18 (Topological boundary versus orbifold boundary). Notice that the orbifold boundary
might be a proper subset of the topological boundary of O. Indeed, the latter might also contain
mirrors, which do not come from the boundary of DG : see Figure 4 for an example. We therefore
stress that, in this paper BO will always denote the orbifold boundary.




        Figure 4. The above is [GL17, Figure 5]. On the right, the bounded Fuchsian group
        D4 ˚D4 acts cocompactly on a fattened tree, with each generator acting as the reflection
        along one of the black lines. On the right, the quotient compact orbifold is a hexagon
        with two orbifold boundary components (in blue), two corner reflectors with stabilisers
        D4 (the black dots), and four mirror segments (in black). The orbifold boundary is
        thus smaller than the whole topological boundary of the hexagon. The peripheral
        subgroup associated to each boundary component is a copy of D8 , generated by the
        reflections along two consecutive black lines.

Remark 1.19. The punctured orbifold O1 is obtained from O by attaching to each orbifold boundary
component C Ď BO a copy of C ˆ r0, 8q, which is the image in O1 of a half-space of H2 cut out by
a boundary line of DG . If C is a circle, this is topologically the same as capping the circle with a
once-punctured disk, justifying the terminology “punctured orbifold”. We stress that, while O and O1
are homotopy equivalent and have the same (orbifold) fundamental group, they are not homeomorphic;
this distinction will later be reflected also in their mapping class groups.
1.2.3. Mapping class groups for orbifolds of conical type. For the rest of the Section, unless otherwise
stated, we shall work under the following assumption:
Definition 1.20. A bounded Fuchsian group is of conical type if it does not contain reflections. As
a consequence, the associated orbifolds O and O1 contain no mirrors, and in particular the topolog-
ical boundary of O coincide with its orbifold boundary. Notice that orientation-preserving bounded
Fuchsian groups are automatically of conical type.
Definition 1.21 (Orbifold mapping class group). Let G be a bounded Fuchsian group of conical type,
and let P be either the compact or the punctured orbifold associated to G. Let HomeopP q be the
group of self-homeomorphisms of P which fix the orbifold boundary BP pointwise, and which map
each cone point to a cone point of the same weight. The extended orbifold mapping class group of
P , denoted by MCG˘ pP q, is the quotient of HomeopP q by isotopies relative to BP and to the cone
points. If P is orientable, we define the mapping class group of P , denoted by MCG pP q, in the
same way, but restricting to orientation-preserving homeomorphism. If P has punctures, the pure
(extended) mapping class group, denoted PMCG pP q (resp. PMCG˘ pP q), is the finite index subgroup
of MCG pP q (resp. MCG˘ pP q) of mapping classes which fix each puncture.
Remark 1.22. Notice that MCG pOq and MCG pO1 q are not isomorphic: the former must fix each
boundary component pointwise, while the latter can permute punctures. The precise relationship
between them is clarified in Lemma 1.25 below.
10                                    E. HADŽIOSMANOVIĆ AND G. MANGIONI


Let P be one of the two orbifolds associated to a bounded Fuchsian group of conical type, and denote
by S the surface obtained from P by removing cone points, which are therefore replaced by punctures.
The following obvious lemma relates the mapping class groups of S and P :
Lemma 1.23. MCG˘ pP q is the finite-index subgroup of MCG˘ pSq. More precisely, an element
f P MCG˘ pSq belongs to MCG˘ pP q if and only if it setwise preserves each collection of punctures
coming from cone points of the same weight.
The surface S is of finite-type (i.e. it is obtained from a compact surface after removing finitely many
punctures). By the classification of surfaces of finite-type (see, e.g. [GX13]), S is homeomorphic to
either:
          b
      ‚ Sg,p , an orientable surface of genus g with p punctures and b boundaries;
           b
      ‚ Ng,p  , a non-orientable surface obtained from the connected sum of g projective planes RP2 by
        removing p punctures and b open disks.
                                                                b
For later purposes, we note that the mapping class group of Ng,p   can be realised as a centraliser inside
the mapping class group of an orientable surface:
                                                                                             2b
Theorem 1.24. Suppose that pg, p, bq R tp1, 0, 0q, p2, 0, 0qu. The orientation double cover Sg´1,2p Ñ
  b
                                               ` b ˘             ` 2b    ˘
Ng,p induces an injective homomorphism MCG Ng,p ãÑ MCG Sg´1,2p whose image consists of the
orientation-preserving homeomorphisms which commute with the deck transformation.
Proof. This is proven in [BC72, Theorem 1] for closed surfaces, in [Sze10, Lemma 3] for surfaces with
boundaries, in [LGGM18, Theorem 1.1] for surfaces with punctures, and finally in [KK24, Lemma 3.1]
                                                                                 2b
for surfaces with boundaries and punctures. Explicitly, one can represent Sg´1,2p      inside R3 in such
a way that it is invariant under the antipodal map Jpx, y,   ` zqb “˘ p´x, ´y,`´zq, and
                                                                                      ˘ then notice that
  2b           2b            b                                                  2b
Sg´1,2p   Ñ Sg´1,2p {J – Ng,p  is a covering. The map MCG Ng,p        Ñ MCG Sg´1,2p     then corresponds
                                                      b
to lifting a representative of a mapping class on Ng,p   to a orientation-preserving homeomorphism of
  2b
Sg´1,2p  ; the choice is unique as the covering has degree two and J is orientation-reversing.        □
The mapping class groups of the two orbifolds associated to a bounded Fuchsian group of conical type
fit into the following central extension:
Lemma 1.25 (Capping extension). Let G be a bounded Fuchsian group of conical type, and let O1 “
H2 {G and O “ DG {G be the associated orbifolds. Let γ1 , . . . , γk be the boundary components of O,
and denote by Ti the Dehn twist along γi . The map MCG pOq Ñ PMCG pO1 q, given by extending a
mapping class on O to the identity on O1 ´ O, fits into a central extension
                                                              ` ˘
                             1 Ñ Zk Ñ MCG pOq Ñ PMCG O1 Ñ 1,
where Zk is generated by tTi ui“1...,k .
Proof. Let S (resp. S 1 ) be the surface obtained from O (resp. O1 ) by removing the singular locus,
and let MCG pS 1 , ˚q be the finite-index subgroup of MCG pS 1 q of all mapping classes which fix each
puncture coming from a boundary component of S, but are allowed to permute punctures coming
from cone points. Since MCG pOq (resp. PMCG pO1 q) sits as a finite-index subgroup of MCG pSq
(resp. MCG pS 1 , ˚q), it is enough to prove the existence of a central extension
                                                               `    ˘
                                 1 Ñ Zk Ñ MCG pSq Ñ MCG S 1 , ˚ Ñ 1.
If S is orientable, this is precisely the capping exact sequence from e.g. [FM12, Proposition 3.19]. In
                                                k                  0
the non-orientable case, suppose that S “ Ng,p    , so that S 1 “ Ng,p`k . By the explicit construction in
Theorem 1.24, we get a commutative diagram
                                               ` 2k    ˘              ´             ¯
            1             Z2k            MCG Sg´1,2p                      0
                                                                 MCG Sg´1,2p`2k   ,˚          1

                          i

                                               ` k ˘                 ´         ¯
                                                                       0
            1        xTi yi“1,...,k         MCG Ng,p              MCG Ng,p`k ,˚              1
                   OUTER AUTOMORPHISM GROUPS, BOUNDED EXTENSIONS, AND HHG                                11

         ´              ¯
           0
where MCG Sg´1,2p`2k , ˚ are all mapping classes fixing the 2k punctures coming from the boundaries
    2k
of Sg´1,2p , and i maps xTi y to xTηi Tη´1               1
                                        1 y, where ηi , ηi are the two boundary curves which lift γi . Then
                                        i
the conclusion follows from the fact that the sequence above is central and exact, and therefore so is
the sequence below.                                                                                      □
The central extension from Lemma 1.25 is almost never trivial (i.e., a product). Take for example
       k                  0
S “ Sg,0 , so that S 1 “ Sg,k . If the extension were trivial, the first homology group H1 pMCG pSq , Zq
                   k
would contain a Z factor by the Künneth formula (see e.g. [Hat02, Theorem 3B.5]), contradicting
the fact that H1 pMCG pSq , Zq is finite as long as g ě 2 [Kor02, Theorem 5.1]. However:
Lemma 1.26. The extension from Lemma 1.25 is bounded.
Proof. Since boundedness passes to sub-extensions by Corollary 1.8, we can assume O has no cone
points, up to replacing it by the underlying S with punctures replacing cone points. By the same
Corollary 1.8, the commutative diagram from the proof of Lemma 1.25 lets us reduce to showing that
the extension                              ` k ˘         ` 0      ˘
                               Zk Ñ MCG Sg,p     Ñ MCG Sg,p`k   ,˚
is bounded. For every curve γi corresponding to a circular boundary component, let Cpγi q`be the ˘ as-
                                                                                             k
sociated annular curve graph, as in [MM00, Section 2], which is a quasiline on which MCG Sg,p     acts
without inverting the ideal endpoints and where the Dehn twist around γi acts loxodromically. Let
ϕi : MCG pOq Ñ R be the Busemann quasimorphism associated to the action, as in Example 1.5, which
we can rescale to map Ti to 1. The integer part of ϕi is therefore a quasimorphism ψi : MCG pOq Ñ Z
which identifies xTi y with Z. Taking the product over all boundary components yields a quasiho-
momorphism ψ “ pψ1 , . . . , ψn q : MCG pOq Ñ Zn which is the identity on Zn – xTi yi“1,...,n , so the
extension is bounded by Proposition 1.6.                                                            □
We finally recall how one can relate the mapping class group of a punctured orbifold O1 “ H2 {G with
the type-preserving outer automorphisms of G:
Definition 1.27 (Type preserving automorphisms). Let G be a bounded Fuchsian group. An auto-
morphism ϕ P Aut pGq is type-preserving if it preserves types of elements, as defined in Remark 1.10,
also distinguishing when a loxodromic has an axis in the interior or on the boundary of DG . Equiva-
lently, an automorphism is type-preserving if it preserves the conjugacy classes of peripheral subgroups.
We denote by Out‹ pGq the quotient of type-preserving automorphisms of G by inner automorphisms
(which are clearly type-preserving, in view of the equivalent formulation).
Suppose that G is of conical type, and let O1 be the associated `      punctured
                                                                            ˘     orbifold. We can identify
G “ π1orb pO1 q with the group of deck transformations Aut π : H2 Ñ O1 of the branched covering: see
e.g. [Cho12, Proposition 4.6.4].
    Now fix a basepoint x0 P O1 which is not a cone point, and let x     r0 P H2 be a lift of x0 . Let S be
the surface obtained by removing cone points from O , so that the branched covering π : H2 Ñ O1
                                                           1

restricts to a regular covering over S. Given a mapping class ϕ P MCG˘ pO1 q, choose a representative
f P HomeopO1 q fixing x0 : this can always be achieved, up to isotopy. By regular covering theory we
can lift f |S to an homeomorphism f 1 of π ´1 pSq fixing x r0 ; then, arguing as in [MH75], one can extend
f 1 to a homeomorphism fr: H2 Ñ H2 which lifts f .
    For every γ P G, the conjugation fr˚ pγq “ frγ fr´1 : H2 Ñ H2 is a deck transformation for π, and is
therefore an element of G. Hence f defines an automorphism fr˚ P Aut pGq. Changing representative
f for ϕ, or changing the basepoints x0 and x   r P π ´1 px0 q, gives elements of Aut pGq which differ by
an inner automorphism; hence we get a well-defined map MCG˘ pO1 q Ñ Out pGq, independent on the
choices we made, which is easily seen to be a group homomorphism. Since elements of MCG˘ pOq
are required to preserve weights of cone points and permute punctures, the above map lands in the
type-preserving outer automorphisms of G. Summing up, we get a well-defined homomorphism
                                               ` ˘
                                        MCG˘ O1 Ñ Out‹ pGq .
12                               E. HADŽIOSMANOVIĆ AND G. MANGIONI


Remark 1.28. In the case where G is torsion-free, so that O1 is a surface with punctures, the above
construction recovers the usual map MCG˘ pO1 q Ñ Out‹ pGq induced by the action on the fundamental
group: every mapping class sends closed curves to closed curves, and therefore acts on the conjugacy
classes of elements of π1 pO1 q (see e.g. [FM12, Section 8.1]).
We now state the Dehn-Nielsen-Baer theorem in the language of our setup.
Theorem 1.29 (Dehn-Nielsen-Baer). Let G be a bounded Fuchsian group of conical type, and let
O1 “ H2 {G be the associated punctured orbifold. The map MCG˘ pO1 q Ñ Out‹ pGq defined above is
an isomorphism.
Proof. The classical version of the Dehn-Nielsen-Baer theorem concerns closed orientable surfaces, and
its proof can be found in e.g. [FM12, Chapter 8]. For orientable orbifolds, we refer to [MH75] and
[Zie73], who also treat the punctured case. These results were then generalised in [Fuj02, Section 3] to
the non-orientable setting.                                                                           □
Remark 1.30. Though we won’t need it, we also mention that Elysia Wang recently generalised
Theorem 1.29, proving an isomorphism between the mapping class group of an orientable surface with
boundary and its fundamental groupoid, with one basepoint on each boundary component [Wan26].
Remark 1.31 (Beyond conical type). In the literature, mapping class groups have been defined also
for several orbifolds of non-conical-type. For instance, Fujiwara [Fuj02] considers orbifolds with mirrors
but without corner reflectors. With his definition, mapping classes are required to preserve boundary
components, mirrors, and cone points with the same weight, all setwise; in other words, his mapping
class group is the same as our MCG pO1 q, after one conflates circular mirrors and circular boundary
components, and in particular it is a finite-index subgroup of the surface obtained by removing bound-
aries and cone points, similarly to our Lemma 1.23. In the same paper, Fujiwara also proved a version
of the Dehn-Nielsen-Baer theorem for these orbifolds. Though Fujiwara’s setting extends ours, we
preferred to restrict our exposition to the minimal setting that we shall need later, in the interest of
conciseness.
1.3. Bass-Serre theory. In this Subsection we recall the definition of a graph-of-groups decomposi-
tion and the associated Bass-Serre tree, referring to [Ser03] or [Bog08, Section 16] for further details.
Definition 1.32 (Graph-of-groups). A bidirected graph Γ consists of two sets V, E together with maps
                          E ÑV ˆV;                                     E Ñ E;
                           e Ñ pipeq, tpeqq                             eÑe
satisfying e “ e, e ‰ e, and ipeq “ tpeq. To parse this definition, the reader should think of V as the
set of vertices; E as the set of oriented edges, which come in pairs; e as the opposite edge of e, and
ipeq, tpeq as the initial and terminal vertices of e.
   A graph-of-groups is the data of:
       ‚ a finite bidirected graph Γ, with vertices V and directed edges E;
       ‚ a collection of vertex groups tGv uvPV ;
       ‚ for every edge e P E, an edge group Ge , satisfying Ge “ Ge , together with an injective
          homomorphism τe : Ge Ñ Gtpeq .
For every v P V let Ev be the collection of edges whose initial endpoint is v. With a little abuse of
notation, we often implicitly identify Ge with τe pGe q and regard it as a subgroup of Gv .
   Let Y be a spanning tree inside Γ. The fundamental group of G based at Y is the group π1 pG, Y q
obtained from the free product            ˆ         ˙ ˆ        ˙
                                              ˚ Gv   ˚   ˚ xxe y
                                              vPV        ePE
by adding the following relations:
     ‚ xe “ x´1
              e ;
     ‚ xe “ 1 if e is an edge of Y ;
                  OUTER AUTOMORPHISM GROUPS, BOUNDED EXTENSIONS, AND HHG                              13


       ‚ For all g P Ge , xe τe pgqx´1
                                    e “ τe pgq.
By [Bog08, Corollary 16.7], up to isomorphism the fundamental group does not depend on the choice
of the spanning tree, so we just denote it by π1 pGq.
   A group G splits over a family of subgroups A if G is isomorphic to the fundamental group of a
graph of groups G whose edge groups are in A. In this case we say that G is a splitting of G over A.
A splitting is relative to a family of subgroups P if every P P P is conjugated into a vertex group. A
splitting is trivial if G coincides with one of the vertex groups.
   For later purposes, we recall the following pioneering result of Stallings, which one can take as the
definition of one-endedness for groups:
Theorem 1.33 ([Sta71]). A finitely generated, infinite group G is one-ended if and only if it does not
split over finite subgroups.
Definition 1.34 (Bass-Serre tree). Given a graph of groups decomposition G of a group G, the
associated Bass-Serre tree is the bidirected tree whose vertices are the G-cosets of vertex groups,
and for every edge e “ pv, wq P E and g P G there is an oriented edge gGe “ pgGv , gxe Gw q. We
often think of T as the underlying undirected graph, forgetting edge orientations. There is a G-
action on T by simplicial isometries and without edge inversions, defined by h ¨ gGv “ hgGv for every
v P V and g, h P G. Notice that the stabiliser of gGv is gGv g ´1 for every v P V , and similarly
StabpgGe q “ gτe pGe qg ´1 “ gxe τe pGe qx´1
                                          e g
                                              ´1
                                                 for every e P E.
Definition 1.35. A subgroup H ď G is elliptic in a decomposition G if it is conjugate to a subgroup
of a vertex group, or equivalently if it fixes a vertex in the Bass-Serre tree.
Remark 1.36 (Canonical splitting). If vertex groups coincide with their normalisers in G, we can
equivalently see the Bass-Serre tree as a graph whose vertices are conjugates of the vertex groups, and
where G acts by conjugations. In particular, the action factors through the central quotient G{ZpGq,
identified with the group of inner automorphisms Inn pGq ď Aut pGq. We further say that the splitting
is canonical if the Inn pGq-action on T extends to an Aut pGq-action by simplicial isometries; if this
happens, every automorphism permutes the conjugacy classes of vertex groups.
1.4. JSJ trees of cylinders for hyperbolic groups. We conclude the background section with
some properties of the Z-JSJ tree of cylinders of a one-ended hyperbolic group G, and the structure
that this splitting induces on Out pGq.
Theorem 1.37. Let G be a one-ended hyperbolic group, and let Z be the family of its virtually Z
subgroups with infinite centre. There exists a canonical splitting G of G over Z, whose vertex groups
tGv uvPEpΓq come in three pairwise exclusive types:
    (1) Elementary vertex subgroups: Gv is a maximal virtually Z subgroup of G.
    (2) Quadratically hanging subgroups: Gv fits in an extension
                                                   v π
                                      1 Ñ Kv Ñ Gv ÝÑ Qv Ñ 1,
         where Kv is finite and Qv is a bounded Fuchsian group of conical type. The edge groups
         incident to Gv coincide with the preimages in Gv of the boundary subgroups of Qv .
    (3) Rigid vertex subgroups: Gv is a non-elementary quasiconvex subgroup (not of type 2), and
         admits no splitting over Z relative to the edge groups.
We denote by Vi for i “ 1, 2, 3 the disjoint subsets of V “ V pΓq corresponding to the three types of
vertices above. Furthermore, every edge of Γ connects a vertex in V1 to a vertex in V2 Y V3 .
We shall call the splitting from Theorem 1.37 the Z-JSJ tree of cylinders for G. We say that a
quadratically hanging subgroup Gv is orientation-preserving if the quotient Fuchsian group Qv is
orientation-preserving.
Remark 1.38. The terminology “quadratically hanging subgroups” first appeared in work of Rips
and Sela in the torsion-free case [RS94, Sel97]. Bowditch [Bow98] calls these subgroups “maximal
14                               E. HADŽIOSMANOVIĆ AND G. MANGIONI


hanging Fuchsian” (again because, with his notation, Fuchsian group can act non-faithfully on H2 ).
We refer to [GL17, page 40] for various other names these groups have assumed.

Remark 1.39 (Quick prerequisites). For the proof of the theorem above we shall assume the reader
has some familiarity with the theory of JSJ decompositions, trees of cylinders, and deformation spaces
of G-trees, so we give a vague intuition here and refer to [GL07, GL11, GL17] for all details. A splitting
G over Z is a JSJ decomposition if it is universally elliptic (meaning that its edge groups are elliptic in
any splitting of G over Z) and dominates every other universally elliptic splitting G 1 over Z (meaning
that its vertex stabilisers are elliptic in G 1 ). Such a decomposition exists by [GL17, Theorem 2.16] (to
apply the theorem, one has to consider splittings over all subgroups of groups in Z, which are either
in Z themselves or finite, and then notice that G is one-ended and therefore does not split over finite
subgroups by Theorem 1.33). Z-JSJ splittings are, in general, not unique: they are arranged in a JSJ
deformation space, an Aut pGq-invariant simplicial complex akin to Outer space for Out pFn q. One
can nonetheless produce a canonical splitting by taking any Z-JSJ decomposition and then passing
to the JSJ tree of cylinders. Roughly, one defines a cylinder as a maximal sub-tree of the Bass-Serre
tree consisting of edges with pairwise commensurable stabilisers; then the tree of cylinders is roughly
obtained from the Bass-Serre tree by collapsing cylinders to points, and then connecting two cylinders
if they overlap over some vertex. In general, the tree of cylinders associated to a deformation space
might not belong to it, as its edge stabilisers might not fall in the original class; however, results from
[DG11] will imply that, in our setting, the tree of cylinders is again a Z-JSJ tree, and satisfies the
properties we listed in Theorem 1.37.

Proof of Theorem 1.37. We first recall that a decomposition as in the Theorem exists, if one allows
vertices in V2 to be finite extensions of bounded Fuchsian groups, not necessarily of conical type.
Indeed, if G is a finite extension of a cocompact Fuchsian group, it is enough to consider the trivial
splitting, whose unique vertex group (of type (2)) is G and without edge groups. For all other one-
ended hyperbolic groups, the existence of a canonical splitting with the required vertex and edge groups
is a result of Bowditch [Bow98, Theorem 0.1], who built on work of Rips and Sela [RS94, Sel97]; in
view of a result of Swarup [Swa96, Theorem 1], the construction applies to all one-ended hyperbolic
groups (besides finite extension of cocompact Fuchsian groups, which we already covered).
   We now argue as in [DG11, Section 4.2] to produce a new decomposition, this time over Z subgroups,
whose quadratically hanging subgroups are finite extensions of fundamental groups of orbifolds of
conical type. Let G0 be the decomposition we constructed above, and perform the following two
operations:
     ‚ For every vertex v of G0 of type 2, let O be the associated orbifold with boundary, and let N
       be a regular neighbourhood of the union of all boundary segments and all mirrors of O which
       avoids cone points. Then one splits the vertex group Gv over the preimages of all subgroups
       corresponding to BN , which are now curves in the interior of O.
     ‚ Next, one collapses all edges of the new decomposition whose stabiliser has finite centre.
The resulting decomposition G1 is now a Z-JSJ decomposition by [DG11, Proposition 4.5]; furthermore,
vertex groups coming from the original quadratically hanging subgroups are now finite extensions of
bounded Fuchsian groups of conical type, and the incident edge groups correspond to the preimages
of boundary subgroups.
   G1 might not be canonical any more, but this can be fixed by passing to the tree of cylinders. Let
T1 be the tree corresponding to the splitting G1 , let T be its tree of cylinders, and denote by G be the
splitting associated to the latter. We claim that G satisfies the requirements of Theorem 1.37. Firstly,
G is again a Z-JSJ splitting by [DG11, Lemma 2.32], and it is canonical by [DG11, Proposition 2.33],
which is an instance of [GL17, Corollary 7.4]. By construction of T , vertices of G come in two types:
     ‚ Those corresponding to cylinders of T1 , whose stabilisers correspond to commensurators of
       edge groups of G1 . In particular, such a vertex group is the maximal virtually cyclic subgroup
       of G containing some edge group of G1 .
                  OUTER AUTOMORPHISM GROUPS, BOUNDED EXTENSIONS, AND HHG                                15


      ‚ Those corresponding to vertices of T1 with non-elementary stabiliser, which belong to more
         than two cylinders. Notice that the stabiliser of such a vertex is the same in G1 and G, and it
         is quasiconvex by [Bow98, Theorem 1.2].
By [GL17, Theorem 6.5], vertices of the second type can be further subdivided into two sub-types:
      ‚ Quadratically hanging subgroups, whose underlying orbifold is of conical type and whose
         incident edge groups are the preimages of boundary subgroups;
      ‚ Rigid subgroups, which admit no splitting relative to the adjacent edge groups.
This yields the required partition of the vertices of G into V1 , V2 and V3 . Finally, by construction of
the tree of cylinders, an edge e of G always connects a cylinder Y with a vertex with non-elementary
stabiliser, proving the “furthermore” part of the statement.                                           □
Before moving on, we point out that edge groups are maximal inside non-elementary vertex groups:
Lemma 1.40. If v P V2 X V3 and e P Ev , Ge is maximal among virtually cyclic subgroups of Gv . In
particular, the centraliser ZGv pGe q coincides with the centre ZpGe q.
Proof. The lemma is implicit in work of Levitt (see e.g. [Lev05, page 13]), but we prove it for complete-
ness. Suppose that e “ pv, wq is an edge, where w P V1 by the “furthermore” part of Theorem 1.37.
Recall that, with the notation from Section 1.3, we are implicitly identifying Ge with the subgroup
                                                           ´1
τe pGe q “ xe τe pGe qx´1
                       e ď Gv . By Theorem 1.37, xe Gw xe     is a maximal virtually cyclic subgroup of
G containing the virtually Z subgroup τe pGe q, and is unique with these properties by e.g. [DGO17,
Lemma 6.5]. Hence, if τe pGe q ď H for some virtually cyclic subgroup H ď Gv , then H ď xe Gw x´1     e ,
and therefore
                 H “ H X xe Gw x´1
                                e ď StabpGv q X Stabpxe Gw q “ StabpGe q “ τe pGe q.

The second statement of Lemma 1.40 follows from the first: since centralisers of infinite order elements
in hyperbolic groups are virtually cyclic (by e.g. [BH99, Corollary III.Γ.3.10]), ZGv pGe q is contained
inside Ge by maximality, and therefore coincides with ZpGe q.                                          □
1.4.1. Relative automorphism groups of vertex groups. We now describe Out pGv q when v P V2 . For
simplicity, we drop the indices and consider any extension
                                                        π
                                        1ÑKÑEÝ
                                             Ñ Q Ñ 1,
where K is finite and Q is a bounded Fuchsian group. Notice that, if K ď P for some finite normal sub-
group P , then the image of P in Q is a finite normal subgroup, and is therefore trivial by Lemma 1.13.
Hence K is the maximal finite normal subgroup of E, and is therefore characteristic, meaning that it is
preserved by all automorphisms of E. In turn, this also means that every automorphism ϕ P Aut pEq
induces an automorphism ϕ P Aut pQq, defined as ϕpπpgqq “ πpϕpgqq. We therefore get a map
                                        ρ : Aut pEq Ñ Aut pQq .
Lemma 1.41. ρ has finite kernel and finite-index image.
Proof. If ϕ P kerpρq, then for every g P E we have ϕpgq “ gk ϕ pgq for some k ϕ pgq P K. Notice that, for
g, h P E,
                             ghk ϕ pghq “ ϕpghq “ ϕpgqϕphq “ gk ϕ pgqhk ϕ phq;
hence
(1)                                    k ϕ pghq “ h´1 k ϕ pgqhk ϕ phq.
In other words, the map k ϕ : E Ñ K is a 1-cocycle with respect to the E-action on K by conjugation.
Notice that a 1-cocycle is uniquely determined by the values it takes on a generating set for E, in view
of Equation (1); hence, since E is finitely generated and K is finite, there are finitely many 1-cocycles,
so kerpρq is finite.
   We now prove that the image of ρ has finite index, following [DG11, Section 2.2]. We say that two
extensions rE1 s, rE2 s of Q with kernel K are equivalent if there exists a commutative diagram
16                               E. HADŽIOSMANOVIĆ AND G. MANGIONI




                                1        K         E1        Q          1
                                           id        „         id

                                1        K         E2        Q          1
Let EpQ, Kq be the set of equivalence classes of extensions of Q with kernel K. Since Q is hyperbolic,
it is finitely presented, and therefore EpQ, Kq is finite by e.g. [DG11, Lemma 2.3]. Note that Aut pQq
                                                                    π
acts on EpQ, Kq as follows: if α P Aut pQq and rEs : 1 Ñ K Ñ E Ý    Ñ Q Ñ 1 is an extension, then α ¨ rEs
                                α˝π
is the extension 1 Ñ K Ñ E ÝÝÑ Q Ñ 1. The new extension is equivalent to the original one if and
only if α lifts to an automorphism of E; therefore, since EpQ, Kq is finite, a finite-index subgroup of
Aut pQq lifts to Aut pEq, thus proving that ρ has finite-index image.                                  □
            ℓ
Let Aut pQq be the image of ρ. By the above lemma we have a finite extension
                                                         ρ          ℓ
                               1 Ñ kerpρq Ñ Aut pEq Ý
                                                    Ñ Aut pQq Ñ 1.
If we take the quotient by the inner automorphisms of E, we get that Out pEq maps with finite kernel
               ℓ                      ℓ
onto Aut pQq {ρpInn pEqq “ Aut pQq { Inn pQq, where we used that every inner automorphism of Q
lifts to an inner automorphism of E. Summarising, we have:
Corollary 1.42. Let 1 Ñ K Ñ E Ñ Q Ñ 1 be a finite extension of a bounded Fuchsian group
Q. The map ρ : Out pEq Ñ Out pQq, mapping every outer automorphism of E to the induced outer
automorphism of Q, has finite kernel and finite-index image.
Though we won’t need this later, for completeness we include a (partial) description of Out pGv q for
vertices of type (1) and (3). Firstly, the next lemma, which follows from results in the literature,
implies that vertex groups of type (1) have finite outer automorphism groups:
Lemma 1.43. A virtually cyclic group has finite outer automorphism group.
Proof. Such a group G surjects onto either Z or the infinite dihedral group D8 “ Z{2 ˚ Z{2 by [Mac96,
Lemma 3.2]. In the former situation, Aut pGq is finite by [Alp62, Theorem 1]. In the latter, Aut pGq is
virtually cyclic by [Pet95, Theorem 3.4]; furthermore G has finite centre, since it is a finite extension
of the centreless group D8 , so the quotient Out pGq “ Aut pGq {pG{ZpGqq is finite.                     □
We finally consider vertex groups of type (3), which are quasiconvex in G by Theorem 1.37 and
therefore hyperbolic. Paulin’s theorem states that a one-ended hyperbolic group has infinite outer
automorphism group if and only if it splits over virtually Z groups [Pau91], see also [Lev05, Theorem
1.4] for a more precise statement. This does not directly apply to vertices of type (3), as they admit no
splitting relative to the edge groups but might split over virtually cyclic subgroups in a different way.
However, combining Rips machinery [BF95] with a relative version of Paulin’s theorem (see [Lev05,
page 13]) yields the following:
Lemma 1.44. If v P V3 , the subgroup of Out pGv q which preserves the conjugacy classes of edge groups
is finite.

                                    2. Out is virtually a HHG. . .
   This section is devoted to the proof of Theorems A, C, and D from the introduction. We start
by recalling a construction of Levitt [Lev05], which abstracts the algebraic properties of the capping
extension. This can be used to express a finite-index subgroup of Out pGq as a bounded central
extension whose base is a product of (virtual) orbifold mapping class groups, thus proving Theorem A.
In Section 2.2 we then leverage the interaction between hierarchical hyperbolicity and central extensions
to prove Theorems C and D: under the assumption that all quadratically hanging subgroups are
orientation-preserving, we show that the outer automorphism group of a one-ended hyperbolic group
G is virtually a HHG, and genuinely a HHG in the cocompact Fuchsian case.
                   OUTER AUTOMORPHISM GROUPS, BOUNDED EXTENSIONS, AND HHG                                         17


2.1. Algebraic mapping class group. Let G be a one-ended hyperbolic group, and let G be the Z-
JSJ tree of cylinders from Theorem 1.37, with underlying graph Γ. With the notation from Section 1.3
and Section 1.4, denote by AutΓ pGv q the subgroup of Aut pGv q consisting of automorphisms that act as
conjugations on each edge group. Let AutBΓ pGv q be the set of tuples pα; ae1 , . . . , aek q P AutΓ pGv q ˆ Gkv
such that α acts as conjugation by ae on Ge . This set can be made into a group by setting
                   pα; ae1 , . . . , aek q ¨ pβ; be1 , . . . , bek q :“ pαβ; αpbe1 qae1 , . . . ; αpbek qaek q.
The projection on the first coordinate gives an epimorphism AutBΓ pGv q Ñ AutΓ pGv q. Furthermore,
if an element of AutBΓ pGv q maps to the identity in AutΓ pGq, then it is of the form pid; ae1 , . . . , aek q,
where each ae belongs to the centraliser ZGv pGe q. Hence we have the following short exact sequence:
                               ź
                          1Ñ       ZGv pGe q Ñ AutBΓ pGv q Ñ AutΓ pGv q Ñ 1.
                                    ePEv

Lemma 2.1 ([Lev05, Lemma 4.1]). If ZGv pGe q ď Ge for all e P Ev , then the extension is central.
Proof. For simplicity suppose there is a single incident edge. Let pid; gq be in the image of ZGv pGe q
and let pα; aq P AutBΓ pGv q. Notice that, since g P ZGv pGe q ď Ge , αpgq “ aga´1 . Hence
                    pα; aqpid; gq “ pα; αpgqaq “ pα; aga´1 aq “ pα; agq “ pid; gqpα; aq,
so the extension is central.                                                                                      □
There is a homomorphism Gv Ñ AutΓ pGv q mapping g to pcg ; g, . . . , gq, where cg is the conjugation
by g. Let PMCG pGv q and MCGB pGv q be the quotients of AutΓ pGv q and AutBΓ pGv q by the image of
Gv , respectively. One then gets the exact sequence
                            ś
                                   ZGv pGe q
(2)                    1 Ñ ePEv              Ñ MCGB pGv q Ñ PMCG pGv q Ñ 1,
                                ZpGv q
which is central if ZGv pGe q ď Ge for all e P Ev . For every e P Ev and every g P ZGv pGe q, the image
of g in MCGB pGv q is called the algebraic Dehn twist by g along e near v.
Remark 2.2. In [GL15], PMCG pGv q has appeared under the name of generalised McCool subgroup,
following McCool’s work on outer automorphisms of free groups fixing a given collection of conjugacy
classes [McC75]. Thus the main content of the Dehn-Nielsen-Baer Theorem 1.29 is that the pure
mapping class group of a punctured surface is a McCool subgroup of its (free) fundamental group,
namely the subgroup fixing the conjugacy classes generated by loops surrounding the punctures. We
shall expand on this in Proposition 2.4 below.
Levitt [Lev05, Proposition 4.2] proved the existence of an “extension” map
                                     ź                λ
(3)                                      MCGB pGv q ÝÑ Out pGq ,
                                             vPV
which is roughly constructed as follows: given pα; ge1 , . . . gek q P AutΓ pGv q, one can extend α to each
adjacent vertex group Gipei q as the conjugation by gei , and then propagate this process across
                                                                                              ś
                                                                                                  the whole
                                                                                        ś           ZGv pGe q
Bass-Serre tree. The map λ has finite-index image, and the kernel N lies in vPV ePEZpG            v
                                                                                                     vq
                                                                                                              ,
so it corresponds
       ś            to   the relations between  Dehn   twists  on   different edge groups.  The  λ-image   of
        ePEv ZGv pGe q
ś
  vPV      ZpGv q      is called the group of twists and is denoted by T .
   Using the extension map, Levitt was able to present a finite-index subgroup of Out pGq as an
extension:
Theorem 2.3. There is an exact sequence
                                                                  ź
                                  1 Ñ T Ñ Out2 pGq Ñ                    PMCG pGv q Ñ 1,
                                                                 vPV2

where Out2 pGq has finite index in Out pGq. If G is torsion-free, then T is free Abelian of rank |E|´|V1 |,
and the extension is central.
18                                 E. HADŽIOSMANOVIĆ AND G. MANGIONI


Proof. This is precisely [Lev05, Theorem 5.1]. We point out that, while Levitt works with Bowditch’s
JSJ decomposition, his arguments from [Lev05, Section 5] only require the existence of a canonical
decomposition satisfying a subset of the properties from Theorem 1.37, and therefore apply to the
Z-JSJ tree of cylinder word by word.                                                              □
Unfortunately, even in the torsion-free case, it is not clear on the nose if the above extension is bounded.
Therefore, in the following pages we shall go through Levitt’s construction step-by-step, to prove that
a (possibly even smaller) finite-index subgroup of Out pGq is indeed a bounded central extension of a
product of bounded Fuchsian groups of conical type. We first specialise algebraic mapping class groups
to vertices of type (2). The next Proposition relates the associated extension of Qv with the mapping
class groups of the corresponding orbifolds:
Proposition 2.4. Suppose Qv is a bounded Fuchsian group of conical type, and let O and O1 the
associated orbifolds. Let γ1 , . . . , γN be the boundary components of O, let Hi ď Qv be the associated
boundary subgroups, and define PMCG pGv q and MCGB pQv q as above, with respect to the collection
tH1 , . . . , HN u. Finally, for all i let Ti P MCG pOq be the Dehn twist around γi . Then there is an
isomorphism of short exact sequences:

                 1         xHi yi“1,...,N       MCGB pQv q           PMCG pQv q           1
                                  –                    –                    –

                 1         xTi yi“1,...,N        MCG pOq             PMCG pO1 q           1
In particular, the above extension is central and bounded by Lemma 1.26.
Notice that the isomorphism on the left identifies the algebraic Dehn twist by a generator of Hi with
the homonymous mapping class Ti , thus justifying the notation.
Proof. We first justify that the kernel of the extension above is xHi yi“1,...,N . Indeed, by Equation (2)
                      śN
                           Z   pH q
the kernel should be i“1ZpQQvvq i ; however Qv has trivial centre by Lemma 1.13, each Hi is isomorphic
to Z, and it is maximal inside Qv , and therefore coincide with its centraliser.
    We now produce the vertical isomorphisms. By construction, PMCG pQv q is precisely the subgroup
of Out‹ pQv q acting by conjugations on boundary subgroups. Then the Dehn-Nielsen-Baer isomorphism
from Theorem 1.29 identifies the latter subgroup with PMCG pO1 q, thus giving the isomorphism on
the right. Next, for every i ď N we can identify Hi with the subgroup generated by the corresponding
Dehn twist, and this gives the isomorphism on the left of the diagram.
    The Proposition then follows from the Five Lemma if we produce a map λ : MCGB pQv q Ñ MCG pOq
making the diagram commute. Let P be the orbifold obtained by attaching a torus with one hole Σi to
each circular boundary component of O. By the Seifert-van Kampen theorem (in its orbifold version,
see e.g. [Thu97, page 307]), the orbifold fundamental group of P splits as a graph of groups whose
vertex groups are π1orb pOq and N copies of π1 pΣi q, and whose edge groups are the Hi ’s for i ď  ` N . Now˘
given ÝÑ
       α “ pα; ai , . . . , aN q a representative of an element in MCGB pQv q, we define A P Aut π1orb pP q
by doing α on π1orb pOq “ Qv , and by conjugating each π1 pΣi q by ai . By the Dehn-Nielsen-Baer
theorem for P , the outer automorphism class of A is induced by a mapping class inside MCG pP q,
which is supported on O Ď P as A preserves the conjugacy class of each curve on Σi for all i. Hence
we get a map λ : MCGB pQv q Ñ MCG pOq, which is a homomorphism by construction.
    We are left to check that the diagram commutes. For the left square, an element ai P ZpHi q is
             Ñ
             Ý
mapped to id “ pid; 1, . . . , 1, ai , 1, . . . 1q, whose image under λ is precisely the Dehn Twist around
γi . Furthermore, given Ý     Ñ P MCGB pQv q, the restriction of λpÝ
                              α                                       Ñq to O1 , seen as the interior of O, is
                                                                      α
precisely the mapping class realising α P PMCG pQv q via the Dehn-Nielsen-Baer isomorphism, so the
square on the right also commutes.                                                                          □
Corollary 2.5. If v P V2 , the extension from Equation (2) is central and bounded. Moreover,
PMCG pGv q is a finite extension of a finite-index subgroup of PMCG pQv q.
                      OUTER AUTOMORPHISM GROUPS, BOUNDED EXTENSIONS, AND HHG                                       19


Proof. ZGv pGe q Ď Ge by Lemma 1.40, so the extension is central by Lemma 2.1. We therefore focus
on boundedness.
   Let ρ : Out pGv q Ñ Out pQv q be the map sending every outer automorphism of Gv to the induced
outer automorphism of Qv , which has finite kernel and finite-index image by Corollary 1.42. Let
tHi uNi“1 be the boundary subgroups of Qv , and for every i let Gei ď Gv be the edge group mapping
                                                    ℓ
to Hi under πv : Gv Ñ Qv . Let PMCG pQv q “ ρpOut pGv qq X PMCG pQv q, which has finite-index
                                                                                ℓ
in PMCG pQv q. Clearly ρpPMCG pGv qq is contained inside PMCG pQv q , and we claim that it has
                                                                                                      ℓ
finite-index. Indeed, let α P Aut pQv q be an automorphism whose outer class belongs to PMCG pQv q ,
                                                                                  ´1
and let a1 , . . . , aN P Qv such that α is the conjugation by ai on Hi . If β P ρ pαq, and if we choose
gi P πv´1 pai q for all i, then for every p P Gei there exists k P Kv such that

                                  βppq “ gi pgi´1 k “ gi ppgi´1 kgi qgi´1 P gi Gei gi´1 .

                                    ℓ
In other words, PMCG pQv q is contained in the ρ-image of the subgroup Mv of Out pGv q which
preserves each Gei up to conjugacy; in turn, the latter is a finite-index overgroup of PMCG pGv q,
as each Gei is virtually cyclic and therefore has finite outer automorphism group by Lemma 1.43.
                                    ℓ
Since ρpPMCG pGv qq ď PMCG pQv q ď ρpMv q, this proves that ρ maps PMCG pGv q to a finite-index
                         ℓ
subgroup of PMCG pQv q , hence of PMCG pQv q. Notice that we have already proven the “moreover”
part of the statement.
   Now consider the diagram

                               śN
                                 i“1 ZpGei q
                  1                ZpGv q             MCGB pGv q               PMCG pGv q                   1

                                        π
                                        pv                     ρp                        ρ

                  1            xHi yi“1,...,N         MCGB pQv q               PMCG pQv q                   1



The map ρp is defined as follows: given Ý    Ñα “ pα; a1 , . . . , aN q P AutBΓ pGv q, ρp maps the outer class of
Ñ
Ý
α to the outer class of pρpαq; πv pa1 q, . . . , πv paN qq. The map π   pv on the left is induced by πv ; this is
because πv surjects each Gei onto Hi and is trivial on the centre of Gv , which is contained inside Kv .
Notice that the diagram commutes by construction.
   We are left to prove that the top extension is bounded: we shall deduce it from the fact that the
bottom one is bounded by Proposition 2.4, with similar arguments as in [FFMS26, Lemma 2.12]. For
every i ď N let ti : Hi Ñ Gei be a homomorphic section of πv , and notice that ti pHi q X ZpGei q is
non-trivial. Since the bottom extension is bounded, Proposition 1.6 provides a quasihomomorphism
                   śN                                       śN
ψ : MCGB pQv q Ñ i“1 Hi which is the identity on i“1 Hi . Then the composition

                                                                              śN         śN
                                                                               i“1 ti
                           B            ρp      B         ψ                   ZpGv q         i“1 ti pHi q
                      MCG pGv q Ý
                                Ñ MCG pQv q Ý
                                            Ñ xHi yi“1,...,N ÝÝÝÝÝÑ
                                                                                             ZpGv q
                                                              śN
                                                                i“1 pti pHi qXZpGei qq
is a quasihomomorphism which is the identity on                    ZpGv q        . A bounded modification of the
                                                                  śN                                   śN
                                                      B            i“1 ZpGei q                              ZpGei q
above map gives a quasihomomorphism MCG                   pGv q Ñ   ZpGv q     which is the identity on i“1
                                                                                                         ZpGv q     ;
hence the extension is bounded, again by Proposition 1.6.                                                          □


We are ready to prove the following, more precise version of Theorem A:
20                               E. HADŽIOSMANOVIĆ AND G. MANGIONI


Theorem 2.6. Let G be a one-ended hyperbolic group. Then Out pGq is virtually a direct product
Zq ˆ M , where M fits into a commutative diagram whose rows are bounded central extensions
                      ś
                       ePEv ZpGe q                B        π
               ś                       ś                       ś
      1         vPV2     ZpGv q          vPV2 MCG pGv q           vPV2 PMCG pGv q        1

                          λ                          λ                           id
                                                             ρ1       ś
       1                Zs                         M                     vPV2 PMCG pGv q          1



Proof. As we now explain, Theorem 2.6 is implicit in the proof of [Lev05, Theorem 5.3] (which again
applies verbatim to the Z-JSJ tree of cylinders from Theorem 1.37). With Levitt’s notation, M is the
image of the restriction of the map λ : vPV MCGB pGv q Ñ Out pGq from Equation (3) to the mapping
                                           ś
class groups of vertex groups of type (2). Furthermore,  ś       by [Lev05, Proposition 4.2] there exists a
map ρ1 from a finite-index subgroup of Out pGq to vPV PMCG pGv q which, when precomposed with
                                         ś           B          ś
λ, gives the natural projection π :        vPV MCG pGv q Ñ        vPV PMCG pGv q. The restriction of π to
ś            B
   vPV2 MCG    pGv q is a central extension    by Lemma   1.40 combined  with Lemma 2.1; furthermore, the
                ´ś        ś             ¯
                            ePEv ZpGe q
                                                                               ś
image Zs – λ         vPV2     ZpGv q      lies in the centre of M because λ :    vPV PMCG pGv q Ñ M is
surjective, and therefore the bottom extension is central as well.
   Moving to boundedness, the top extension is a direct product of bounded central extensions by
Corollary 2.5, and is therefore bounded by Corollary 1.7. The bottom extension is then bounded by
Corollary 1.9.                                                                                           □
2.2. (Virtual) hierarchical hyperbolicity. We now move to the proof of Theorems C and D. To
make the exposition lighter, we defer the lengthy definition of a hierarchically hyperbolic group (HHG)
to Section 3.1, as we will need the full power of the hierarchical machinery only in the proof of the
counterexample, Theorem E. The reader can therefore blackbox the following facts about HHGs, which
are the only ones we shall need in this Section.
   Firstly, we recall the motivating example of a HHG:
Theorem 2.7 ([BHS19, Theorem 11.1]). Let S be an orientable surface of finite-type. Then MCG˘ pSq
is a HHG.
Several group operations preserve hierarchical hyperbolicity:
Lemma 2.8. The following facts hold.
  (1) A finite-index subgroup of a HHG is a HHG.
  (2) Let F ď G be a finite normal subgroup. If G{F is a HHG then G is a HHG.
  (3) If G, H are HHGs, then G ˆ H is a HHG.
  (4) Let 1 Ñ K Ñ E Ñ G Ñ 1 be a central extension, with finitely generated kernel. If G is a
      HHG, then E is a HHG if and only if the extension is bounded.
Proof. Item 1 and Item 2, follow from the definition of a HHG [BHS19, Definition 1.21]; see Remark 3.4
below for more details. Moreover, Item 3 is [BHS19, Corollary 8.28], and Item 4 is [FFMS26, Theorem
3.12].                                                                                              □
Remark 2.9. Let O be an orientable orbifold of conical type. Recall from Lemma 1.23 that the
mapping class group of O is a finite-index subgroup of the mapping class group of the surface obtained
by removing cone points, which is therefore itself orientable. Thus MCG pOq is a HHG, by combining
Theorem 2.7 and Lemma 2.8.(1).
We are finally ready to prove Theorems C and D. We first consider virtual surface groups, for which
we do not need to pass to a subgroup of Out pGq:
Theorem 2.10. Let G be a finite extension of an orientation-preserving, cocompact Fuchsian group
Q of conical type. Then Out pGq is a HHG.
                  OUTER AUTOMORPHISM GROUPS, BOUNDED EXTENSIONS, AND HHG                                21


Proof. By Corollary 1.42, Out pGq is a finite extension of a finite-index subgroup of Out pQq. Since Q
is cocompact and of conical type, by Theorem 1.29 Out pQq coincides with the mapping class group of
the orbifold H2 {Q; in turn, since Q is orientation-preserving, the latter is a HHG by Remark 2.9. The
conclusion now follows by Lemma 2.8.(1) and (2).                                                     □
The proof for the general case is similar, but it involves the description of Out pGq as a virtual central
extension from Section 2.1:
Theorem 2.11. Let G be a one-ended hyperbolic group. If all quadratically hanging subgroups in the
Z-JSJ tree of cylinders are orientation-preserving, then Out pGq is virtually a HHG.
Proof. Firstly, if v P V2 , then PMCG pGv q coincides with the pure mapping class group of the un-
derlying orbifold by Proposition 2.4, and is therefore a HHG by Remark 2.9 (here we are using that
Qv is orientation-preserving and of conical type). Corollary 2.5 then describes PMCG pGv q as a finite
extension of a finite-index subgroup of PMCG pGv q, so PMCG pGv q is a HHG by Lemma 2.8.(1) and
(2). Now, the subgroup M from Theorem 2.6 is a bounded central extension of the direct product of
PMCG pGv q, where v ranges in V2 , and is therefore a HHG by combining Lemma 2.8.(3) and (4). Fi-
nally, the same Theorem 2.6 describes a finite-index subgroup of Out pGq as a direct product of copies
of Z and M , so the conclusion follows from Lemma 2.8.(3) (and the fact that Z, being hyperbolic, is
also hierarchically hyperbolic).                                                                    □
Remark 2.12. In the proofs of both Theorem 2.10 and Theorem 2.11, the orientability assumption
only appeared when we used that the mapping class group of an orientable orbifold of conical type is
hierarchically hyperbolic; it could therefore be removed if one proved that the mapping class group of
a non-orientable orbifold of conical type is also a HHG.

                                        3. . . . but not a HHG
    In this Section we present an example of a torsion-free hyperbolic group whose full outer automor-
phism group fails to be a hierarchically hyperbolic group, proving Theorem E. To this purpose, we
first unpack the definition of a hierarchically hyperbolic group in the next subsection.
3.1. Background on hierarchical hyperbolicity.
Definition 3.1 (Hierarchically hyperbolic space). Let δ ą 0 and X be a pδ, δq–quasigeodesic space. A
hierarchically hyperbolic space (HHS) structure with constant δ for X is the data of an index set S and
a set tCpW q : W P Su of δ-hyperbolic spaces pCpW q, dW q such that the following axioms are satisfied.
    (1) (Projections.) For each W P S, there exists a projection πW : X Ñ 2CpW q that is a pδ, δq–
        coarsely Lipschitz, δ–coarsely onto, δ–coarse map.
    (2) (Nesting.) If S ‰ H, then S is equipped with a partial order Ď and contains a unique
        Ď–maximal element, denoted by S. When V Ď W , we say V is nested in W . For each W P S,
        we denote by SW the set of all V P S with V Ď W . Moreover, for all V, W P S with V Ĺ W
        there is a specified non-empty subset ρVW Ď CpW q with diampρVW q ď δ.
    (3) (Finite complexity.) Any Ď–chain has length at most δ.
    (4) (Orthogonality.) The set S has a symmetric relation called orthogonality. If V and W
        are orthogonal, we write V K W and require that V and W are not Ď–comparable. Further,
        whenever V Ď W and W K U , we require that V K U . We denote by SK        W the set of all V P S
        with V K W .
    (5) (Containers.) For each W P S and U P SW with SW XSK           U ‰ H, there exists Q P SW ´tW u
        such that V Ď Q whenever V P SW X SK     U . We  call Q  the container of U in W .
    (6) (Transversality.) If V, W P S are not orthogonal and neither is nested in the other, then we
        say V and W are transverse, denoted V &W . Moreover, for all V, W P S with V &W , there
        are non-empty sets ρVW Ď CpW q and ρW  V Ď CpV q, each of diameter at most δ.
    (7) (Consistency.) For all␣ x P X and U, V, W P S:             (
           ‚ if V &W , then min dW pπW pxq, ρVW q, dV pπV pxq, ρW
                                                                V q ď δ,
22                               E. HADŽIOSMANOVIĆ AND G. MANGIONI


            ‚ if U Ď V and either V Ĺ W , or V &W and W M U , then dW pρU            V
                                                                                W , ρW q ď δ.
     (8) (Bounded geodesic image (BGI).) For all V, W P S and for all x, y P X, if V Ĺ W
         and dV pπV pxq, πV pyqq ě δ, then every CpW q–geodesic from πW pxq to πW pyq must intersect
         Nδ pρVW q.
     (9) (Large links.)          For all W P S and x, y P X, there exists a collection tV1 , . . . , Vm u Ď
         SW ´ tW u such that m ď δdW pπW pxq, πW pyqq ` δ, and for all U P SW ´ tW u, either U Ď Vi
         for some i, or dU pπU pxq, πU pyqq ď δ.
   (10) (Partial realization.) If tVi u is a finite collection of pairwise orthogonal elements of S and
         pi P CpVi q for each i, then there exists x P X realising the tuple ppi q, meaning that, for every
         i and every W P S:
            ‚ dVi pπVi pxq, pi q ď δ;
            ‚ if Vi Ĺ W or W &Vi then dW pπW pxq, ρVWi q ď δ.
   (11) (Uniqueness.) There exists a function θ : r0, 8q Ñ r0, 8q so that for all r ě 0, if x, y P X
         and dX px, yq ě θprq, then there exists W P S such that dW pπW pxq, πW pyqq ě r.
   We use S to denote the HHS structure. We call an element U P S a domain, the associated space
CpU q its coordinate space, and call the maps ρVW the relative projections from V to W . The quantity δ
is called a hierarchy constant for S. We often suppress reference to the projection maps, so for every
x, y P X and U P S we write dU px, yq to mean dU pπU pxq, πU pyqq.
Definition 3.2 (Hierarchically hyperbolic group). A finitely generated group G is a hierarchically
hyperbolic group (HHG) if the following hold.
     (i) G acts metrically properly and coboundedly on a space X admitting a HHS structure S.
    (ii) There is a Ď–, K–, and &–preserving action of G on S by bijections such that S contains
         finitely many G–orbits.
   (iii) For each W P S and g P G, there exists an isometry gW : CpW q Ñ CpgW q satisfying the
         following for all V, W P S and g, h P G.
            ‚ The maps pghqW : CpW q Ñ CpghW q and ghW ˝ hW : CpW q Ñ CphW q coincide.
            ‚ For each x P X, gW pπW pxqq “ πgW pg ¨ xq in CpgW q.
            ‚ If V &W or V Ĺ W , then gW pρVW q “ ρgV
                                                    gW in CpgW q.
We often drop the indices and denote each gW simply by g. When the underlying HHS is not relevant,
we denote a HHG by pG, Sq.
Remark 3.3 (Moral compass). When reading the definitions above, one should keep in mind the
motivating example of a HHG, which is the mapping class group of an orientable surface S, possibly
with boundary and punctures. In this context, X is the marking complex from [MM00, Section 2.5];
the elements of S are isotopy classes of subsurfaces, with nesting given by inclusion and orthogonality
corresponding to disjointness (both up to isotopy); finally, the coordinate space associated to a subsur-
face is the corresponding curve graph, onto which X maps via the subsurface projection. The various
axioms from Definition 3.1 abstract properties of curve graphs and markings from [MM99, MM00].
Remark 3.4. It follows from Definition 3.2 that a finite-index subgroup of a HHG, or an extension
of a HHG by a finite kernel, is itself a HHG via the action on the same space. This justifies Item 1
and Item 2 of Lemma 2.8.
Remark 3.5 (HHS versus HHG). If f : X Ñ Y is a quasi-isometry and pY, Sq is a HHS, then
composing the coordinate projections with f gives a HHS structure on X. In particular, a group quasi-
isometric to a HHG is a hierarchically hyperbolic space. However, being a hierarchically hyperbolic
group is not even preserved by commensurability: for instance, the p3, 3, 3q-triangle group is a finite-
index overgroup of Z2 but admits no HHG structure by [PS23, Corollary 4.5]. This subtlety will also
be reflected in the proof of Theorem E.
Notation 3.6. For the rest of the section, let pX, Sq be a HHG structure for a group G, and let
x0 P X be a basepoint. All definitions below are instances of more general notions, which are often
stated under weaker assumptions; we refer to [BHS19, BHS21] for further details.
                   OUTER AUTOMORPHISM GROUPS, BOUNDED EXTENSIONS, AND HHG                                 23


The following is the natural notion of quasiconvexity for subspaces of a HHS.
Definition 3.7. A subset Y Ď X of a HHS pX, Sq is hierarchically quasiconvex (hqc) if there exists
a function κ : Rě0 Ñ Rě0 such that:
    (1) For every W P S, πW pY q is κp0q-quasiconvex;
    (2) For every r ě 0 and x P X, if supW PS dW px, Y q ď r, then there exists y P Y such that
        dX px, yq ď κprq.
We say that a subgroup H ď G of a HHG is hierarchically quasiconvex if so is H ¨ x0 Ď X for some
(equivalently, any) basepoint x0 .
The next lemma follows by combining [Man26, Lemma 4.9] and [BHS21, Lemma 1.20]:
Lemma 3.8. The intersection of two hierarchically quasiconvex subgroups of a HHG is hierarchically
quasiconvex.
Definition 3.9. The rank of pX, Sq is the maximum integer ν P N for which there exists ν pairwise
orthogonal, unbounded domains. In the setting of Notation 3.6, the rank also coincides with the
maximal n for which there exists a quasi-isometrically embedded copy of Rn inside X.
Definition 3.10. Let U “ tU1 , . . . , Uk u Ď S be pairwise orthogonal, unbounded domains. A standard
k-flat supported on U is a subspace F Ď X such that πUi pF q is a bi-infinite quasiline for every
i “ 1, . . . , k, while πW pF q is uniformly bounded for every W P S´U. A standard k-flat is hierarchically
quasiconvex, the second item of Definition 3.7 being true by the partial realisation axiom.
The following is [HRSS25, Proposition 2.17]:
Proposition 3.11. Let pX, Sq be a HHG structure for a group G, let x0 be a basepoint, and let A ď G
be a virtually Zk subgroup for some k ě 1. Then there exists l ě k and an A-invariant collection of
pairwise orthogonal domains U “ tU1 , . . . , Ul u such that:
    (1) There exists L ě 0 such that diamW pA ¨ x0 q ď L for all W R U ;
    (2) For 1 ď i ď l, πUi pA ¨ x0 q is a quasiline.
Corollary 3.12. In the above setting, if A is virtually Zν , where ν is the rank of pX, Sq, then A ¨ x0
is a standard flat, and in particular it is hierarchically quasiconvex.
Proof. By Proposition 3.11, there exists k ě ν such that A ¨ x0 is contained in a standard k-flat F .
Notice that we must have k “ ν, as the latter is defined as the maximal cardinality of a collection of
pairwise orthogonal elements with unbounded coordinate spaces. Thus A ¨ x0 and F are both ν-flats,
and the former is undistorted in the latter by e.g. [HHP23, Corollary E]. Finally, a quasi-isometric
embedding between Euclidean spaces of the same dimension is actually a quasi-isometry by e.g. [KL12,
Theorem 3.8], proving that A ¨ x0 coarsely coincides with F and is thus a standard flat.            □
3.2. The counterexample. We are finally ready to prove Theorem E, which we restate in more
details. Let Σ “ S11 be a torus with one open disk removed. Let K be the 2-complex obtained by
gluing three copies Σ1 , Σ2 , Σ3 along the boundary circle C, as in Figure 1, and let G “ π1 pKq. The
Seifert-van Kampen Theorem yields a splitting G of G whose vertex groups are each Gi – π1 pΣi q and
GC – π1 pCq, and edge groups identify GC with the boundary subgroup of each Gi .
Lemma 3.13. With the above notation, G is a one-ended, torsion-free hyperbolic group; furthermore,
the decomposition G satisfies all properties from Theorem 1.37.
Proof. A finite subgroup of G must fix a point on the Bass-Serre tree of G; hence G is torsion-free,
as so are the vertex groups Gi – F2 and GC – Z. Furthermore, G is hyperbolic as it satisfies the
requirements of [KM98, Corollary 2]. By Stallings’ theorem Theorem 1.33, to prove G is one-ended
we have to show that, whenever G acts on a tree T with trivial edge stabilisers, there is a global fixed
point. To see this, for 1 ď i ă j ď 3 let Sij “ Σi Y Σj , so that π1 pSij q is a surface subgroup of G. Each
π1 pSij q is one-ended, so it fixes a point pij in every G-action on a tree with trivial edge stabilisers.
24                                 E. HADŽIOSMANOVIĆ AND G. MANGIONI


Then Gi “ π1 pSij q X π1 pSik q fixes the geodesic rpij , pik s; in turn, G fixes the intersection of these three
geodesics, which is non-empty since T is a tree.
   For the “furthermore” part, the only non-trivial fact to check is that G is canonical. This is because,
by [Laf07, Theorem 1.2], every automorphism of G is induced by a homeomorphism of K, and must
therefore preserve the conjugacy classes of vertex groups.                                                     □

By the above Lemma, G fits the framework of Theorem 2.11: indeed, the quadratically hanging
subgroups of G are precisely the fundamental groups of the Σi , which are orientable surface groups.
Hence Out pGq is virtually a HHG. However:
Theorem 3.14. With the above notation, Out pGq is not a HHG.
The core of the proof below is, morally, that any HHG structure for Out pGq would induce a HHG
structure for the subgroup generated by Dehn twists and the elements permuting the Σi ’s; this sub-
group is isomorphic to the p3, 3, 3q-triangle group, which admits no HHG structure as mentioned in
Remark 3.5. We will actually need a weaker fact, as we now explain.

Proof. Towards a contradiction let pX, Sq be a HHG structure for Out pGq. For each i let Ti P Out pGq
be (the outer automorphism class of) the Dehn twist of Gi around GC , which span a subgroup T
isomorphic to Z2 as T1 T2 T3 “ 1. We first prove the following:
Claim 3.15. T is hierarchically quasiconvex.

Proof. Let Out
           Ą pGq be the finite-index subgroup of Out pGq mapping each torus to itself in an orientation-
preserving way. This subgroup fits inside a central extension
                                                         3
                                                         ź        ` ˘
                                 1 Ñ T Ñ Out
                                         Ą pGq Ñ               MCG Σ1i Ñ 1,
                                                         i“1

where Σ1i “ S1,1 is obtained from Σi by gluing a once-punctured disk to the boundary curve (see the
introduction of [Lev05]; one can also check that Out   Ą pGq coincides with the subgroup Out2 pGq from
Theorem 2.3). Since Ą  Out pGq has finite index in Out pGq, pX, Sq is also a HHG structure for Ą     Out pGq.
In particular, the above central extension is bounded by Lemma 2.8.(4), and in turn Theorem 1.2 gives
      Ą pGq is quasi-isometric to the direct product T ˆ ś3 MCG pΣ1 q.
that Out                                                          i“1        i
    For every i “ 1, . . . , 3 let Zi be an infinite cyclic subgroup of MCG pΣ1i q, and let F – Z5 be the
preimage of xZ1 , Z2 , Z3 y inside Ą Out pGq. Notice that the rank of Out
                                                                        Ą pGq, defined as in Definition 3.9,
is exactly 5 because Out pGq is quasi-isometric to a product of Z and three free groups; hence F – Z5
                       Ą                                              2

is hierarchically quasiconvex by Corollary 3.12.
    Since MCG pΣ1i q is virtually free for every i, we can find infinite cyclic subgroups Zi1 ď MCG pΣ1i q
which intersect the corresponding Zi trivially. Let F 1 be the preimage of xZ11 , Z21 , Z31 y inside Out
                                                                                                     Ą pGq.
         1                                                                                  1
Since F is hierarchically quasiconvex as well, by Lemma 3.8 the intersection T “ F XF is hierarchically
quasiconvex (in the HHG structure for Out    Ą pGq, which is the same as that for Out pGq).                ■

   By Proposition 3.11, T projects to quasilines on a collection L of at least two pairwise orthogonal
domains, and to uniformly bounded sets elsewhere. Since T – Z2 is hierarchically quasiconvex, L
must contain exactly two elements, or it would coarsely coincide with a standard flat of higher rank.
   Now let σ be the element of Out pGq induced by cyclically permuting the three surfaces. Notice that
σTi σ ´1 “ Ti`1 , where indices are taken modulo 3; in particular σ normalises T , and therefore acts
on L. Since σ has order 3 while |L| “ 2, σ fixes each U P L; for the same reason, the action of σ on
BCpU q is trivial for every U P L, since CpU q is a quasiline and therefore only has two ideal endpoints.
Now let U P L be such that T12 acts loxodromically on U , which exists by [DHS20, Theorem 3.1], and
let ε P BCpU q be the attracting endpoint for this action. But then T22 “ σT12 σ ´1 and T32 “ σ 2 T12 σ ´2
also act on U “ σpU q “ σ 2 pU q with ε “ σpεq “ σ 2 pεq as the attracting endpoint, contradicting the
fact that T12 T22 T32 “ 1.                                                                              □
                    OUTER AUTOMORPHISM GROUPS, BOUNDED EXTENSIONS, AND HHG                                        25


                                                  References
[AH]     Pénélope Azuelos and Mark Hagen. A hierarchical flat torus theorem. In preparation.
[Alp62]  J. L. Alperin. Groups with finitely many automorphisms. Pacific J. Math., 12:1–5, 1962.
[BC72]   Joan S. Birman and D. R. J. Chillingworth. On the homeotopy group of a non-orientable surface. Proc.
         Cambridge Philos. Soc., 71:437–448, 1972.
[BF95]   Mladen Bestvina and Mark Feighn. Stable actions of groups on real trees. Invent. Math., 121(2):287–321,
         1995.
[BH99]   Martin R. Bridson and André Haefliger. Metric spaces of non-positive curvature, volume 319 of Grundlehren
         der mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences]. Springer-Verlag,
         Berlin, 1999.
[BHS17a] Jason Behrstock, Mark F. Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Asymptotic dimension and small-cancellation for
         hierarchically hyperbolic spaces and groups. Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (3), 114(5):890–926, 2017.
[BHS17b] Jason Behrstock, Mark F. Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Hierarchically hyperbolic spaces, I: Curve complexes
         for cubical groups. Geom. Topol., 21(3):1731–1804, 2017.
[BHS19]  Jason Behrstock, Mark Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Hierarchically hyperbolic spaces II: Combination the-
         orems and the distance formula. Pacific J. Math., 299(2):257–338, 2019.
[BHS21]  Jason Behrstock, Mark F. Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Quasiflats in hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. Duke
         Math. J., 170(5):909–996, 2021.
[BJ25]   Hyungryul Baik and Wonyong Jang. On the kernel of actions on asymptotic cones. J. Group Theory,
         28(4):753–809, 2025.
[Bog08]  Oleg Bogopolski. Introduction to group theory. EMS Textbooks in Mathematics. European Mathematical
         Society (EMS), Zürich, 2008. Translated, revised and expanded from the 2002 Russian original.
[Bow98]  Brian H. Bowditch. Cut points and canonical splittings of hyperbolic groups. Acta Math., 180(2):145–186,
         1998.
[Cal09]  Danny Calegari. scl, volume 20 of MSJ Memoirs. Mathematical Society of Japan, Tokyo, 2009.
[Cho12]  Suhyoung Choi. Geometric structures on 2-orbifolds: exploration of discrete symmetry, volume 27 of MSJ
         Memoirs. Mathematical Society of Japan, Tokyo, 2012.
[DG11]   François Dahmani and Vincent Guirardel. The isomorphism problem for all hyperbolic groups. Geom. Funct.
         Anal., 21(2):223–300, 2011.
[DGO17] F. Dahmani, V. Guirardel, and D. Osin. Hyperbolically embedded subgroups and rotating families in groups
         acting on hyperbolic spaces. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 245(1156):v+152, 2017.
[DHS20]  Matthew Durham, Mark Hagen, and Alessandro Sisto. Correction to the article Boundaries and automor-
         phisms of hierarchically hyperbolic spaces. Geometry & Topology, 24:1051–1073, 09 2020.
[FFMS26] Francesco Fournier-Facio, Giorgio Mangioni, and Alessandro Sisto. Bounded cohomology, quotient exten-
         sions, and hierarchical hyperbolicity, 2026.
[FM12]   Benson Farb and Dan Margalit. A primer on mapping class groups, volume 49 of Princeton Mathematical
         Series. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2012.
[Fri17]  Roberto Frigerio. Bounded cohomology of discrete groups, volume 227 of Mathematical Surveys and Mono-
         graphs. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2017.
[Fuj02]  Koji Fujiwara. On the outer automorphism group of a hyperbolic group. Israel J. Math., 131:277–284, 2002.
[Ger92]  S. M. Gersten. Bounded cocycles and combings of groups. Int. J. Algebra Comput., 2(3):307–326, 1992.
[GL07]   Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt. Deformation spaces of trees. Groups Geom. Dyn., 1(2):135–181, 2007.
[GL11]   Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt. Trees of cylinders and canonical splittings. Geom. Topol., 15(2):977–
         1012, 2011.
[GL15]   Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt. McCool groups of toral relatively hyperbolic groups. Algebr. Geom.
         Topol., 15(6):3485–3534, 2015.
[GL17]   Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt. JSJ decompositions of groups. Astérisque, (395):vii+165, 2017.
[GX13]   Jean Gallier and Dianna Xu. A guide to the classification theorem for compact surfaces, volume 9 of Geometry
         and Computing. Springer, Heidelberg, 2013.
[Hat02]  Allen Hatcher. Algebraic topology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002.
[HHP23]  Thomas Haettel, Nima Hoda, and Harry Petyt. Coarse injectivity, hierarchical hyperbolicity and semihyper-
         bolicity. Geom. Topol., 27(4):1587–1633, 2023.
[HRSS25] Mark Hagen, Jacob Russell, Alessandro Sisto, and Davide Spriano. Equivariant hierarchically hyperbolic
         structures for 3-manifold groups via quasimorphisms. Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble), 75(2):769–828, 2025.
[HT09]   Graham Hope and Ulrike Tillmann. On the Farrell cohomology of the mapping class group of non-orientable
         surfaces. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 137(1):393–400, 2009.
[Kat92]  Svetlana Katok. Fuchsian groups. Chicago Lectures in Mathematics. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
         IL, 1992.
[KK24]   Takuya Katayama and Erika Kuno. The mapping class group of a nonorientable surface is quasi-isometrically
         embedded in the mapping class group of the orientation double cover. Groups Geom. Dyn., 18(2):407–418,
         2024.
26                                  E. HADŽIOSMANOVIĆ AND G. MANGIONI


[KL12]   Ilya Kapovich and Anton Lukyanenko. Quasi-isometric co-Hopficity of non-uniform lattices in rank-one semi-
         simple Lie groups. Conform. Geom. Dyn., 16:269–282, 2012.
[KM98]   O. Kharlampovich and A. Myasnikov. Hyperbolic groups and free constructions. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.,
         350(2):571–613, 1998.
[Kor02]  Mustafa Korkmaz. Low-dimensional homology groups of mapping class groups: a survey. Turkish J. Math.,
         26(1):101–114, 2002.
[Laf07]  Jean-François Lafont. Diagram rigidity for geometric amalgamations of free groups. J. Pure Appl. Algebra,
         209(3):771–780, 2007.
[Lev05]  Gilbert Levitt. Automorphisms of hyperbolic groups and graphs of groups. Geom. Dedicata, 114:49–70, 2005.
[LGGM18] Daciberg Lima Gonçalves, John Guaschi, and Miguel Maldonado. Embeddings and the (virtual) cohomolog-
         ical dimension of the braid and mapping class groups of surfaces. Confluentes Math., 10(1):41–61, 2018.
[Mac67]  A. M. Macbeath. The classification of non-Euclidean plane crystallographic groups. Canadian J. Math.,
         19:1192–1205, 1967.
[Mac96]  Dugald Macpherson. Permutation groups whose subgroups have just finitely many orbits. In Ordered groups
         and infinite permutation groups, volume 354 of Math. Appl., pages 221–229. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht,
         1996.
[Man08]  Jason Fox Manning. Actions of certain arithmetic groups on Gromov hyperbolic spaces. Algebr. Geom.
         Topol., 8(3):1371–1402, 2008.
[Man26]  Giorgio Mangioni. A combination theorem for hierarchically quasiconvex subgroups, and application to
         geometric subgroups of mapping class groups, 2026. Accepted in Algebr. Geom. Topol.
[Mar25]  Bruno Martelli. An introduction to geometric topology. Independently published, 4th Edition, 2025. Available
         at https://people.dm.unipi.it/martelli/Geometric_topology.pdf.
[McC75]  James McCool. Some finitely presented subgroups of the automorphism group of a free group. J. Algebra,
         35:205–213, 1975.
[MH75]   C. Maclachlan and W. J. Harvey. On mapping-class groups and Teichmüller spaces. Proc. London Math.
         Soc. (3), 30(part):496–512, 1975.
[MM99]   Howard A. Masur and Yair N. Minsky. Geometry of the complex of curves. I: Hyperbolicity. Invent. Math.,
         138(1):103–149, 1999.
[MM00]   H. A. Masur and Y. N. Minsky. Geometry of the complex of curves. II: Hierarchical structure. Geom. Funct.
         Anal., 10(4):902–974, 2000.
[Pau91]  Frédéric Paulin. Outer automorphisms of hyperbolic groups and small actions on R-trees. In Arboreal group
         theory (Berkeley, CA, 1988), volume 19 of Math. Sci. Res. Inst. Publ., pages 331–343. Springer, New York,
         1991.
[Pet95]  Martin R. Pettet. Finitely generated groups with virtually free automorphism groups. Proc. Edinburgh Math.
         Soc. (2), 38(3):475–484, 1995.
[Pet24]  Harry Petyt. Mapping class groups are quasicubical, 2024. Accepted in American Journal of Mathematics.
[PS23]   Harry Petyt and Davide Spriano. Unbounded domains in hierarchically hyperbolic groups. Groups Geom.
         Dyn., 17(2):479–500, 2023.
[RS94]   E. Rips and Z. Sela. Structure and rigidity in hyperbolic groups. I. Geom. Funct. Anal., 4(3):337–371, 1994.
[Rua01]  Kim E. Ruane. Dynamics of the action of a CATp0q group on the boundary. Geom. Dedicata, 84(1-3):81–99,
         2001.
[Sel97]  Z. Sela. Structure and rigidity in (Gromov) hyperbolic groups and discrete groups in rank 1 Lie groups. II.
         Geom. Funct. Anal., 7(3):561–593, 1997.
[Ser03]  Jean-Pierre Serre. Trees. Springer Monographs in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003. Translated
         from the French original by John Stillwell, Corrected 2nd printing of the 1980 English translation.
[Sta71]  John Stallings. Group theory and three-dimensional manifolds, volume 4 of Yale Mathematical Monographs.
         Yale University Press, New Haven, Conn.-London, 1971. A James K. Whittemore Lecture in Mathematics
         given at Yale University, 1969.
[Swa96]  G. A. Swarup. On the cut point conjecture. Electron. Res. Announc. Amer. Math. Soc., 2(2):98–100, 1996.
[Sze10]  Blażej Szepietowski. Embedding the braid group in mapping class groups. Publ. Mat., 54(2):359–368, 2010.
[Thu97]  William P. Thurston. Three-dimensional geometry and topology. Vol. 1, volume 35 of Princeton Mathematical
         Series. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1997.
[TW25]   Bingxue Tao and Renxing Wan. Proper actions on finite products of hyperbolic spaces, 2025.
[Wan26]  Elysia Wang. The Dehn-Nielsen-Baer Theorem for bounded surfaces, 2026.
[Zie73]  Heiner Zieschang. On the homeotopy group of surfaces. Math. Ann., 206:1–21, 1973.

     (Ervin Hadžiosmanović) Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy
     Email address: ervin.hadziosmanovic@sns.it

   (Giorgio Mangioni) Maxwell Institute and Department of Mathematics, Heriot-Watt University, Edin-
burgh, UK
   Email address: gm2070@hw.ac.uk
