 NON-CONVERGENCE OF SOME NON-COMMUTING DOUBLE ERGODIC
                       AVERAGES


                                                  TIM AUSTIN




            A BSTRACT. Let S and T be measure-preserving transformations of a probability space
            pX, B, µq. Let f be a bounded measurable functions, and consider the integrals of the
                                      ¸ » f pS xqf pT xq dµpxq pn ¥ 1q.
            corresponding ‘double’ ergodic averages:
                                   n 1
                                 1            i        i
                                 n i 0
                                                                               Ñ8
            We construct examples for which these integrals do not converge as n     . These include
            examples in which S and T are rigid, and hence have entropy zero, answering a question
            of Frantzikinakis and Host.
                Our proof begins with a corresponding construction for orthogonal operators on a
            Hilbert space, and then obtains transformations of a Gaussian measure space from them.
   Let S and T be measure-preserving transformations of a probability space pX, B, µq.
Let f and g be bounded measurable functions. The corresponding ‘double’ ergodic aver-
ages are the functions
                              1 ¸
                                  
                                n 1
(1)                                  f pS i xqg pT i xq      px P X, n ¥ 1q.
                              n i 0
These are examples of ‘multiple’ ergodic averages. They lie beyond the setting of the clas-
sical ergodic theorems. Such averages appear in Furstenberg’s ergodic theoretic proof of
Szemerédi’s theorem [9], and again in his proof with Katznelson of the multi-dimensional
Szemerédi theorem [11].
   If the transformations S and T commute, then the averages in (1) converge in L2 [4].
Convergence of related averages in L2 has been studied in many other works as well,
culminating in Walsh’s proof of convergence in L2 for a large class of multiple averages
whenever the transformations involved generate a nilpotent group [18].
   By contrast, even if S and T commute, almost sure convergence remains unknown
except under various additional assumptions. Most famously, in [3] Bourgain proves the
almost sure convergence of (1) for any S when T  S 2 . The more recent papers [12]
and [6] contain various other pointwise convergence results, such as for multiple ergodic
averages when the transformations commute and generate a distal action. Those papers
also contain a more complete description of the literature.
   The pairs of transformations that arise from additive combinatorics via Furstenberg’s
correspondence principle typically do commute, but it is natural to ask whether conver-
gence could be deduced without this assumption. In general, the answer is No: Furstenberg
offers a simple example in [10, p40], and several others have been presented since then.
   However, positive results have been found under a variety of extra assumptions. Most
of these fall into one of the following categories:

      2020 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary: 37A30; Secondary: 47A35, 28A05, 37A44.
                                                       1
2                                           TIM AUSTIN


        i. If one of the transformations, say S, has a special structure, then the resulting se-
           quences pf pS n xqqn for x P X might be especially simple in ways that help to
           prove convergence. For example, convergence holds both in L2 and pointwise al-
           most surely if S has quasi-discrete spectrum. This follows by the methods in [16],
           which addresses related but different questions around ‘weak disjointness’.
       ii. If S and T are ‘sufficiently different’, then the sequences are forced to be so un-
           alike that the averages converge because of some unavoidable long-run cancella-   ³
           tions.³ For example, the averages must converge almost surely to the product of f
           and g in case S and T are ergodic and disjoint [2], and also when the individual
           spectral types of S and T are mutually singular [1]. In the latter paper Assani also
           proves a relative version of that result over any factors of S and T for which the
           relevant convergence is already known.
      iii. In a different direction, one can generalize the averages in (1) by considering ex-
           pressions of the form
                           
                          n 1
                             f pS apiq xqg pT bpiq xq
                       1 ¸
(2)
                       n i0
                                                         px P X, n ¥ 1q
          for positive-integer-valued functions a and b that may be non-linear. Convergence
          results are known for various specific choices of such functions. Some of the
          strongest are in the papers [7] and [8], which also include a more complete review
          of the recent literature. When comparing the averages (1) with this generalized
          setting, we refer to them as the ‘linear’ and ‘non-linear’ cases respectively. The
          paper [8] also extends some of the older counterexamples to the non-linear case.
   Contrasting with (i) above, in all of the previously published examples of non-convergence
in the linear case, both S and T are isomorphic to Bernoulli shifts. This leaves a gap be-
tween the ‘highly random’ transformations that appear in counterexamples and the ‘highly
structured’ ones for which the positive results in (i) are known.
   The first main result of [8] sheds some light into this gap. It asserts that the averages (2)
do converge in L2 when apnq is linear, bpnq is an integer polynomial of degree at least 2,
and T has entropy zero. In that paper, Frantzikinakis and Host ask explicitly whether a
counterexample in the linear case can be found in which either S or T has entropy zero.
   From the side of counterexamples, another recent work [13] provides some of these
with entropy zero when apnq and bpnq are both integer polynomials of degree at least 5.
   This note provides a new construction of counterexamples to convergence in the linear
case of the averages in (1) (and even of the integrals of those averages). In these exam-
ples, S and T are both isomorphic to an arbitrary ergodic Gaussian system. Referring
to pX, B, µ, S q for definiteness, this means that it is ergodic and that there is a function
f P L2 pµq with the following properties:
            f  0 and }f }2  1;
          ³


          the process pf  S n qn has a Gaussian joint distribution and generates the whole
          sigma-algebra B modulo µ.
These systems are a classical source of examples in ergodic theory: see, for instance, [5,
Section 8.2 and Chapter 14]. They include examples that are rigid and hence have zero
entropy.
Theorem. Let pX, B, µ, S q be an ergodic Gaussian system and let f P L2 pµq have the
properties above. Then there is another transformation T on the same space, isomorphic
to S, such that
            NON-CONVERGENCE OF SOME NON-COMMUTING DOUBLE ERGODIC AVERAGES                                      3


       i. the process pf  T n qn is Gaussian with the same distribution as pf  S n qn , and it
          also generates B modulo µ, and
      ii. the averages
                         1 ¸
                             
                           n 1»
                                      f pS i xqf pT i xq dµpxq                 pn ¥ 1q
                         n i0
       have limit supremum equal to 1 and limit infimum equal to 1.
Examples of S and T arising here can be rigid, and hence have zero entropy.
Remark. After a version of the present note first appeared, Xiangdong Ye communicated
to me that the authors of [13] can also adapt their construction to the linear case: see [14].
   The ergodic theory of Gaussian systems is relatively tractable because it depends only
on their spectra. As a result, the heart of our theorem is a corresponding fact about orthog-
onal operators on real Hilbert spaces. We establish this first, and then complete the proof
of the theorem by constructing a Gaussian measure space.
Proposition. Let H be a real Hilbert space, let U be a weakly mixing orthogonal trans-
formation of it, and let ξ be a star-cyclic unit vector for U (that is, the linear span of
tU n ξ : n P Zu is dense in H). Then there is another orthogonal transformation V ,
conjugate to U , such that
      i1 . ξ is also star-cyclic for V and satisfies xU i ξ, ξ y  xV i ξ, ξ y for every i, and
     ii1 . the averages
                                  1 ¸ i
                                       
                                      n 1
(3)
                                  n i0
                                        xU ξ, V i ξy                 pn ¥ 1 q
         have limit supremum equal to 1 and limit infimum equal to 1.
Proof. Step 1.    Since the operator U is weakly mixing, we have
                                   n 1
                                 1 ¸
                                      
(4)
                                 n i0
                                       }P U i ξ} Ñ 0             as n Ñ 8

whenever P is an orthogonal projection with finite dimensional range.
   Step 2. Choose a sequence of positive integers n1             n2                       . . . by the following
recursion. Set n1 : 1. Once n1 , . . . , nk have been chosen, let
                              Nk : spantU i ξ : 0 ¤ i                     nk u,
and let Pk be the orthogonal projection onto Nk . Since Nk has finite dimension, the
convergence in (4) holds for this projection. Choose nk 1 ¡ nk so large that
                                          nk1
                                            ¸
                                                   1
(5)
                                  1
                                                        }Pk U i ξ}         1
                                                                                   .
                                 nk 1       i 0                       k       1

  Step 3. Let Nk and Pk be as defined in Step 2. Observe that Nk increases with k.
Define a pairwise orthogonal sequence of subspaces M1 , M2 , . . . by
                                          Mk : Nk X NkK1 ,
and let Qk be the orthogonal projection onto Nk . It follows that Nk is the orthogonal sum
of M1 , M2 , . . . , Mk , or equivalently
                       Pk  Pk  1          Qk  Q1                 Qk       @k ¥ 1,
4                                                     TIM AUSTIN


setting P0 : 0 for convenience.
   Let
                              W : 1  2Q2  2Q4     .
This is an orthogonal operator: it reverses all the vectors in M2 , M4 , . . . , and it fixes any
vector orthogonal to these subspaces.
   Finally, let V : W U W .
      Step 4. Since ξ lies in M1 , it is orthogonal to all of M2 , M4 , . . . , and so
(6)                                           V iξ  W U iξ       @i P Z.
Therefore, since ξ is star-cyclic for U and W is an isomorphism, ξ is also star-cyclic for
V . In addition, (6) implies that
                               xV i ξ, ξy  xW U i ξ, ξy  xU i ξ, W ξy  xU i ξ, ξy.
This proves property (i1 ).
   Step 5. It remains to prove (ii1 ). Intuitively, (5) and (6) combine into the following
behaviour:
        For i up to the time n1 , V i x agrees with U i x. Beyond that, for ‘most’
        i up to the much later time n2 , ‘most of’ the vector V i x is the reflection
        of ‘most of’ U i x through the origin. Beyond that, for ‘most’ i up to the
        still much later time n3 , ‘most of’ the vector V i x agrees with U i x again.
        These behaviours continue to alternate after that.
   To explain this precisely, let i nk . Then U i ξ lies in Nk , and so
(7)                                   U i ξ  Pk U i ξ  P k  1 U i ξ        Qk U i ξ.
As a result, when n  nk , the average in (3) is equal to
                      1 k¸
                          n    1                               1 k¸
                                                                     n       1
(8)
                      nk i0
                             xPk1 U i ξ, Pk1 V i ξy           nk i0
                                                                       xQk U i ξ, Qk V i ξy.
The first of these two sums is controlled by (5):
                  
                      1 ¸
                          n    1                        
                                                             1 ¸
                                                                         n   1
                               x Pk1 U i ξ, Pk1 V i ξ y ¤          }Pk1 U i ξ}
                           k                                      k
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                   .
                      n k i 0                               n k i 0                             k
To estimate the second sum, observe that
                                                  "

                                       Qk W 
                                                      Qk          if k is odd
                                                      Qk         if k is even.
Combined with (6), this gives
                                    Qk V i ξ  Qk W U i W ξ  p1qk1 Qk U i ξ.
Now we insert these ingredients back into (8) and apply (7) and then (5):
               1 ¸
                      n   1                                 p1qk1 n 1 }Q U i ξ}2
                                                                              ¸
                      xU i ξ, V i ξy  Op1{kq
                   k                                                          k

                                                                                       k
               nk i0                                           nk           i 0

                                                             p1qk1 nk
                                                                      ¸ 1
                                             Op1{kq                                p1  }Pk1 U i ξ}2 q
                                                                nk            
                                                                              i 0
                                             Op1{kq p1qk1 p1  Op1{kqq.
This approaches 1 (resp. 1) as k grows along odd (resp. even) values.                                     □
            NON-CONVERGENCE OF SOME NON-COMMUTING DOUBLE ERGODIC AVERAGES                       5


Proof of the theorem. Let H be the closed span of tf  S n : n P Zu in L2 pµq, let ξ : f ,
and let U be the restriction of the Koopman operator of S to H. Since S is an ergodic
Gaussian dynamical system, it is actually weakly mixing [5, Theorem 14.2.1], and hence
so is the restriction U . We may therefore apply the proposition to find another orthogonal
transformation V conjugate to U which has properties (i1 ) and (ii1 ).
    Because the process pf S n qn is Gaussian and generates B, the measure space pX, B, µq
is canonically isomorphic to the Gaussian measure space constructed from H: see, for
instance, [15, Appendices B–D]. In this picture, the whole of L20 pµq is identified with the
symmetric Fock space over H, and H itself appears as a linear subspace called the ‘first
chaos’. Any orthogonal transformation of the first chaos extends canonically to a measure-
preserving transformation of pX, B, µq [15, Appendix E]. In the case of U , this extension
is the transformation S that we started with. The extension of V is a new transformation T ,
and any orthogonal operator that conjugates U and V extends to an isomorphism between
S and T .
    All transformations obtained from orthogonal operators in this way preserve the first
chaos H. Therefore, since f lies in H, the images f  T n stay in H, and hence define
a Gaussian process. Now property (i) follows from property (i1 ) because f is star-cyclic
under V as well as under U , and because
     »                                                   »

         f pT xqf pxq dµpxq  xV ξ, ξ y  xU ξ, ξ y 
             i                     i            i
                                                             f pS i xqf pxq dµpxq   @i P Z.
Similarly, since f  S n and f  T n both lie in H for all n, the integrals in assertion (ii) are
simply the inner products in assertion (ii1 ) of the proposition, and so (ii1 ) implies (ii).
   Finally, the distribution of an ergodic stationary centred Gaussian process is uniquely
specified by its spectral measure σ, and this can be any atomless finite Borel measure on
T that is symmetric under complex conjugation [5, Section 8.2]. Having chosen σ for our
process pf  S n qn , the maximal spectral type of the whole transformation S on L20 pµq is
given by
                                      σσ         σ  σ  σ 
                                   1            1
                              σ
                                   2!          3!
(see, for instance, [5, Theorem 14.3.1]). In particular, if σ is atomless but has a rigidity
sequence, such as the measures discussed in [17, Sections 7.14–18], then S has the same
rigidity sequence, and then so does T because they are isomorphic. In this case their
maximal spectral type has no absolutely continuous component, and so they also have
entropy zero.                                                                                  □

Remark. The function f obtained above is not bounded. However, given that those aver-
ages of inner products fail to converge, the same must be true for sufficiently high trunca-
tions of f , so bounded examples are also available.
Remark. Let ap1q ap2q . . . be positive integers and let bpiq : apiq. The theorem and
proposition above can be extended to the resulting non-linear averages (as in (2)) whenever
the analog of (4) holds for the averages along the subsequence of times papiqqi , as pointed
out to me by Sohail Farhangi. If U is strongly mixing, then this condition holds for any
subsequence of times, and some strongly mixing examples given by our construction still
have entropy zero. On the other hand, if apiq is an increasing polynomial function of i, then
the analog of (4) holds under the same hypotheses as in the linear case. This is because the
weak mixing of S (or U ) implies the required analog of (4) by applying the norm ergodic
theorem along polynomial sequences to the weakly mixing operator U b U .
6                                             TIM AUSTIN


   The known examples of non-convergence of the averages (1) provide rather diverse
measure-preserving transformations in the role of S (or T ). Many further questions about
such transformations could be pursued. For example, it would be interesting to know
whether any weakly mixing transformation can appear as S; whether the ranks of S and
T could help to control the averages in (1) (Gaussian examples always have infinite rank,
and so do those in [14]); or which two-step distal transformations can appear.
   In [8], Frantzikinakis and Host also pose various questions about recurrence involving
non-commuting transformations. I do not think the methods of the present note come close
to answering these.
Acknowledgements. I am grateful to Mariusz Lemańczyk for bringing recent work in this
area to my attention, and to Nikos Frantzikinakis, Xiangdong Ye, el Houcein el Abdalaoui,
Sohail Farhangi and an anonymous referee for some helpful remarks about earlier versions
of this note.
   For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a Creative Commons Attribution
(CC-BY) licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission.

                                            R EFERENCES
      [1] I. Assani, “Pointwise convergence of nonconventional averages”, Colloq. Math. 102 (2005), no. 2,
          245–262
      [2] D. Berend, “Joint ergodicity and mixing”, J. Analyse Math. 45 (1985), 255–284
      [3] J. Bourgain, “Double recurrence and almost sure convergence”, J. Reine Angew. Math. 404 (1990),
          140–161
      [4] J.-P. Conze and E. Lesigne, “Théorèmes ergodiques pour des mesures diagonales”, Bull. Soc. Math.
          France 112 (1984), no. 2, 143–175
      [5] I.P. Cornfeld, S.V. Fomin and Ya. G. Sinaı̆, Ergodic Theory, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1982
      [6] S. Donoso and W. Sun, “Pointwise convergence of some multiple ergodic averages”, Adv. Math. 330
          (2018), 946–996
      [7] N. Frantzikinakis, “Furstenberg systems of Hardy field sequences and applications”, J. Anal. Math.
          147 (2022), no. 1, 333–372
      [8] N. Frantzikinakis and B. Host, “Multiple recurrence and convergence without commutativity”, J.
          Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 107 (2023), no. 5, 1635–1659
      [9] H. Furstenberg, “Ergodic behaviour of diagonal measures and a theorem of Szemerédi on arithmetic
          progressions”, J. d’Analyse Math. 31 (1977), 204–256
     [10] H. Furstenberg, Recurrence in Ergodic Theory and Combinatorial Number Theory, Princeton Uni-
          versity Press, Princeton, 1981
     [11] H. Furstenberg and Y. Katznelson, “An ergodic Szemerédi theorem for commuting transformations”,
          J. d’Analyse Math. 34 (1978), 275–291
     [12] W. Huang, S. Shao and X. Ye, “Pointwise convergence of multiple ergodic averages and strictly
          ergodic models”, J. Anal. Math 139 (2019), no.1, 265–305
     [13] W. Huang, S. Shao and X. Ye, “A counterexample on polynomial multiple convergence without
          commutativity”, eprint arXiv:2301.12409
     [14] W. Huang, S. Shao and X. Ye, “A counterexample on multiple convergence without commutativity”,
          eprint arXiv:2407.10728
     [15] A.S. Kechris, Global Aspects of Ergodic Group Actions, Mathematical Surveys and Monographs vol.
          160, American Mathematical Society, 2010
     [16] E. Lesigne, B. Rittaud and T. de la Rue, “Weak disjointness of measure-preserving dynamical sys-
          tems”, Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems 23 (2003), no. 4, 1173–1198
     [17] M. Nadkarni, Spectral Theory of Dynamical Systems, Springer, Singapore, 2020
     [18] M.N. Walsh, “Norm convergence of nilpotent ergodic averages”, Ann. of Math. (2) 175 (2012), no.
          3, 1667–1688

   M ATHEMATICS I NSTITUTE , Z EEMAN B UILDING , U NIVERSITY OF WARWICK , C OVENTRY CV4 7AL,
U NITED K INGDOM
   Email address: tim.austin@warwick.ac.uk
