                                                                                    TOWARDS A FLUID COMPUTER


                                                                      ROBERT CARDONA, EVA MIRANDA, AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS


                                                   Abstract. In 1991, Moore [20] raised a question about whether hydrodynamics is capable of performing computa-
                                                   tions. Similarly, in 2016, Tao [25] asked whether a mechanical system, including a fluid flow, can simulate a universal
                                                   Turing machine. In this expository article, we review the construction in [8] of a “Fluid computer” in dimension 3
                                                   that combines techniques in symbolic dynamics with the connection between steady Euler flows and contact geometry




arXiv:2405.20999v1 [math.DS] 31 May 2024
                                                   unveiled by Etnyre and Ghrist. In addition, we argue that the metric that renders the vector field Beltrami cannot
                                                   be critical in the Chern-Hamilton sense [9]. We also sketch the completely different construction for the Euclidean
                                                   metric in R3 as given in [7]. These results reveal the existence of undecidable fluid particle paths. We conclude the
                                                   article with a list of open problems.




                                                                                                   1. Introduction

                                              In the realm of decision problems, the halting problem stands as a cornerstone. Turing showed in [28] that it is
                                           impossible to create a universal algorithm capable of deciding whether any given computer program will stop running
                                           or continue indefinitely. This breakthrough marked a significant moment in history of logic and mathematics and
                                           led to an important computation model: the Turing machine.
                                              The undecidability of the halting problem raised natural questions: Which physical models are capable of uni-
                                           versal computation and thus exhibit undecidable phenomena? What types of physics might transcend computation?
                                           (Penrose [21]) Can hydrodynamics perform computations? (Moore [20]). Examples of physical problems where this
                                           kind of complexity has been shown to arise include 3D billiards [20], 3D optical systems [23], neural networks [24]
                                           or the spectral gap in quantum many-body physics [10]. In a series of works we addressed the following related
                                           question posed by Moore [20] and revisited by Tao [27, 25, 26]: Is hydrodynamics capable of universal computation?
                                              Fundamental to the understanding of physical phenomena and dynamical systems in general is the study of
                                           the computational complexity that may arise in a given class of systems. This complexity can include undecidable
                                           phenomena (implied, for instance, by the capacity of the system to perform universal computation) or computational
                                           intractability, which is relevant not only from a purely theoretical point of view but also in terms of applications
                                           to developing algorithms to determine the long-term behavior of a given physical system. This complexity is
                                           often captured by the existence of undecidable (or computationally intractable) trajectories: there exist explicitly
                                           computable initial conditions and open sets of phase space for which determining if the trajectory will intersect that
                                           open set can be undecidable or arbitrarily complex from an algorithmic point of view.
                                              In this survey article, we present some recent results on the connections between Turing machines and the
                                           equations of hydrodynamics. In [8] we constructed stationary solutions of the Euler equations on a Riemannian
                                           3-dimensional sphere that can simulate any Turing machine (i.e., they are Turing complete). In particular, these
                                           solutions exhibit undecidable paths. Using different techniques, specifically the Cauchy-Kovalevskaya theorem and
                                           the theory of gradient dynamical systems, in [7] we constructed Turing complete stationary solutions to the Euler
                                           equations in Euclidean space. The drawback of these solutions is that they have infinite energy, so they correspond
                                           to non-physical fluid flows.
                                              This article is organized as follows: In Section 2 we introduce the definition of Turing machines and Turing
                                           complete dynamical systems. In Section 3 we introduce the Euler equations, their stationary solutions, and their
                                           connection to contact geometry. The ideas of our constructions of Turing complete Euler flows in [8] and [7] are
                                           sketched in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. We also highlight a new consequence of the construction in [8]: the Turing
                                           completeness of this construction implies that the metric which makes the vector field Beltrami cannot be critical

                                               Robert Cardona and Eva Miranda were partially supported by the project reference PID2019-103849GB-I00 by MI-
                                           CIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033/ and the AGAUR grant 2021 SGR 00603. Eva Miranda is supported by an ICREA Academia
                                           Prize 2021 and Bessel Prize of the Alexander Von Humboldt foundation and by the Spanish State Research Agency, through
                                           the Severo Ochoa and Marı́a de Maeztu Program for Centers and Units of Excellence in R&D (project CEX2020-001084-M).
                                           Daniel Peralta-Salas is supported by the grants CEX2023-001347-S, RED2022-134301-T and PID2022-136795NB-I00 funded by
                                           MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033. All authors are supported by the project Computational, dynamical and geometrical complex-
                                           ity in fluid dynamics - AYUDAS FUNDACIÓN BBVA A PROYECTOS INVESTIGACIÓN CIENTÍFICA 2021.
                                                                                                             1
2                           ROBERT CARDONA, EVA MIRANDA, AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS


for the Chern-Hamilton energy functional (Proposition 4.3). Finally, in Section 6 we conclude with some appealing
open problems.

                                    2. Undecidability and Turing machines

   Undecidable phenomena in mathematics are usually established by reducing a problem to another one which
is well-known to be undecidable. We describe here Turing machines and the notion of Turing completeness of a
dynamical system, which relates certain properties of the orbits of the system with the halting problem for Turing
machines.

2.1. Turing machines. A Turing machine is defined as T = (Q, q0 , qhalt , Σ, δ), where Q is a finite set of states,
from which we label an initial state q0 and a (different) halting state qhalt , a finite set Σ called the alphabet of
symbols from which we label a blank symbol that we denote by a zero, and a transition function
                                          δ : Q × Σ −→ Q × Σ × {−1, 0, 1}.
A configuration of the machine is an element in Q × A, where A denotes the countable set of infinite sequences
in ΣZ that have only finitely many non-blank symbols. An input (or starting configuration) of the machine is a
configuration of the form (q0 , t), where q0 is the initial state and t = (ti )i∈Z is a sequence in A (referred to as the
“tape” of the machine)
   The algorithm follows the rules below. Let (q, t) ∈ Q × A be the configuration at a given step of the algorithm,
for instance at the first step it will be an initial configuration.
      1. If the current state is qhalt then halt the algorithm and return t as output.
      2. Otherwise, compute δ(q, t0 ) = (q ′ , t′0 , ε), where t0 denotes the symbol in position zero of t. Let t′ be the
         tape obtained by replacing t0 with t′0 in t, and shifting by ε (by convention +1 is a left shift and −1 is a
         right shift). The new configuration is (q ′ , t′ ), and we can go back to step 1.
The set P := Q × A is the set of configurations, and the algorithm determines a global transition function, which
is the dynamical interpretation of the machine, given by
                                               ∆ : Q \ {qhalt } × A → P,
that sends a configuration to the configuration obtained after applying one step of the algorithm.

   The so-called halting is (computationally) undecidable, as shown by Alan Turing in 1936. There is no algorithm
that, given any Turing machine T and an initial configuration c, can tell in finite time whether T reaches a config-
uration whose state is the halting state or not. This implies that for some pairs (T, c), the statement “T halts with
c” can be true/false but unprovable, i.e., undecidable in the sense of Gödel.
   Another important fact that we will need is the existence of universal Turing machines, which can loosely be
defined as follows.
Definition 2.1. A Turing machine TU is universal if the following property holds. Given any other Turing machine
T and an initial configuration c of T there exists a (computable) initial configuration cU (T, c) of TU , that depends
on T and its initial configuration, such that T halts with c if and only if TU halts with cU .

   As a consequence of the undecidability of the halting problem, a universal Turing machine has inputs for which
the halting problem is true/false but unprovable.

2.2. Turing complete dynamical systems. In this section we want to formalize what it means for a dynamical
system to be able to “simulate” a universal Turing machine, i.e., to be capable of universal computation. In the
next definition the dynamical system X can be discrete or continuous defined on some topological space M .
Definition 2.2. A dynamical system X on M is Turing complete if there exists a universal Turing machine TU
such that for each initial configuration c of TU , there exists a (computable) point pc ∈ M and a (computable) open
set Uc ⊂ M such that TU halts with input c if and only if the positive trajectory of X through pc intersects Uc .

   In this case, the halting of a given configuration is equivalent to a certain property of the orbit of X through
an explicit point in M . It is completely essential that pc and Uc are in some sense computable. If we are working
on a manifold M , a point pc is computable (in terms of c) if in some chart the coordinates of pc can be exactly
computed in finite time (in terms of c), for instance having explicit rational coordinates. Computability of an open
set Uc can be loosely defined as saying that one can explicitly approximate Uc with any given precision. It is clear
                                             TOWARDS A FLUID COMPUTER                                                     3


that a Turing complete dynamical system possesses undecidable trajectories: the long-term behavior of an orbit is
undecidable in general.
   Even if this is not explicitly stated in the definition of Turing completeness, there is a general approach to
constructing them. We first define an “encoding” function that assigns to each configuration (q, t) of a certain
universal Turing machine TU a set U(q,t) ⊂ M . We map the initial configurations (q0 , tin ) to points p(q0 ,tin ) , and
every other configuration as a point or an open set. We then require that for each initial configuration (q0 , tin ),
the trajectory of X through p(q0 ,tin ) sequentially intersects the points or sets corresponding to the configurations
obtained by iterating the Turing machine starting with (q0 , tin ). Namely, the trajectory through (q0 , tin ) will first
intersect the set that encodes ∆(q0 , tin ), then the set that encodes ∆2 (q0 , tin ) and so on, without intersecting any
other coding set in between. With this property, we can consider the open set U obtained as the union of all the
open sets U(qhalt ,t) for each t ∈ A, and the trajectory through p(q0 ,tin ) will intersect U if and only if the machine TU
halts with initial configuration (q0 , tin ).


                                           3. Ideal fluids in equilibrium

  The motion of an ideal fluid, which is a fluid that is incompressible and has no viscosity, on a Riemannian
manifold (M, g) is described by the Euler equations
                                            (
                                              ∂
                                              ∂t X + ∇X X   = −∇p ,
                                              div X = 0 .

Here p is a scalar function called the pressure and X is the velocity field of the fluid. The term ∇X X denotes
the covariant derivative of X along X, and in general, the velocity field X depends on time. A solution to the
Euler equations is called stationary whenever X does not depend on time: it models an ideal fluid in equilibrium.
Introducing the dual one-form α = g(X, ·), the stationary Euler equations can be rewritten as
                                                (
                                                  ιX dα = −dB ,
                                                  dιX µ = 0 ,

where B = p + 12 ∥X∥ is the Bernoulli function, and µ is the Riemannian volume form. There is a subclass of station-
ary solutions, to which our constructions belong, which is the set of Beltrami fields. These are (volume-preserving)
vector fields parallel to their curl, which is the only vector field Y such that ιY µ = dα. These correspond to solutions
for which the Bernoulli function is constant.

   Given a Riemannian manifold (M, g), constructing a stationary solution with some desired dynamical property
requires finding a solution to the PDE, which might be a rather difficult task. We will do this in the second
construction that we describe in Section 5. Another approach, which allows for more flexibility, requires the notion
of Eulerisable flow.
Definition 3.1. A vector field X on a manifold M is Eulerisable if there exists an ambient metric g for which X
is a stationary solution to the Euler equations in (M, g).

   Hence, if one wants to show that a vector field with specific dynamics models a fluid in equilibrium, there is more
room to prove it if we do not fix the metric for which we want the vector field to solve the Euler equations. We will
use this approach in the first construction, which we describe in Section 4.
   There is an important class of vector fields which are Eulerisable: Reeb fields in contact geometry. Recall that
a one-form α on a three-dimensional manifold M is a contact form if α ∧ α > 0 everywhere. The kernel of α is a
plane distribution ξ called a contact structure. Any other one-form f α with f a positive function in M is another
contact form defining ξ as well. The Reeb vector field R associated to a given contact form α is determined by the
equations
                                                ιR α = 1 ,     ιR dα = 0 .                                           (3.1)
The flow of R preserves the contact form and thus is a volume-preserving vector field. The same holds for any
positive reparametrization hR of R, which preserves the volume form h1 α ∧ dα. We call a vector field that is a
positive multiple of a Reeb field a Reeb-like vector field. The main connection between Reeb-like fields and the
Euler equations was established by Etnyre and Ghrist [12]. For the statement, we recall that a Beltrami field X is
rotational if its curl is a non-zero multiple of X.
4                           ROBERT CARDONA, EVA MIRANDA, AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS


Theorem 3.1. Let M be a 3-dimensional manifold. Any smooth, nonsingular rotational Beltrami field on M is
a Reeb-like field for some contact form on M . Conversely, given a contact form α on M with Reeb field X, any
nonzero rescaling of X is a smooth, nonsingular rotational Beltrami field for some Riemannian metric on M .

   We will use this theorem in the next section to show that a certain Reeb vector field is a stationary solution to
the Euler equations for some metric.


        4. Constructing stationary ideal fluids that are Turing complete (construction 1)

  In this section we review the construction of a Turing complete stationary Euler flow on a Riemannian three-
sphere [8]. In the first subsection we introduce Moore’s theory of generalized shifts, which is used in the second
subsection to construct Turing complete diffeomorphisms of the disk and Reeb flows.

4.1. Cantor sets, Turing machines and symbolic dynamics. The simplest and most ubiquitous of fractals is
the Cantor set, which can be drawn in one dimension. We can define it iteratively on an interval of a line: to do
this, we divide the interval into three parts and remove the central part; then, we do the same with each of the
two new resulting intervals, and so on. This is the so called ternary Cantor set, although we shall usually omit the
adjective “ternary” in what follows.
   But what do fractals have to do with Turing machines? It turns out that both are connected through the Cantor
set. By its construction, this set is closely related to the development of a number in base 3. In his 1991 theory,
Moore uses that development to encode the configurations of a Turing machine in the square Cantor set, the fractal
set obtained by considering the product of two Cantor intervals. Thus, each configuration of the Turing machine
corresponds to a unique point in the square Cantor set, and the evolution of the machine can be visualized as a
movement between points in this set.
   The main result of Moore’s theory is that there exists a block transformation that maps the square Cantor set
onto itself in such a way that every point associated with a Turing machine’s configuration is sent to the point
associated with the next configuration according to the algorithm. The details of this block transformation depend
on the description of the machine, but we can always think of it as moving a finite number of blocks. In summary,
Moore shows that the evolution of any algorithm can be understood as a dynamical system defined on the Cantor
set.
   These ideas introduced by Moore are key to our proof in [8]. Building on them, we managed to construct a
transformation on a disk (filling in the gaps left by Moore’s block transformation to avoid discontinuities) that is
capable of simulating a universal Turing machine.
   The ideas above are embodied in the concept of generalized shift introduced by Moore [20] in 1991 to simulate
any Turing machine.
   A generalized shift is a map that acts on the space of infinite sequences on a given finite alphabet. Specifically, let
A be an alphabet and, let S ∈ AZ be an infinite sequence. A generalized shift ϕ : AZ → AZ is specified by two maps
F and G which depend on a finite number of specified sequence positions in AZ . Denote by DF = {i, ..., i + r − 1}
and DG = {j, ..., j + l − 1} the sets of positions on which F and G depend, respectively. These functions indeed
take a finite number of different values as they depend on a finite number of positions. The function G changes the
sequence exclusively at the positions specified by DG :


                                                    G : Al −→ Al
                                             (sj ...sj+l−1 ) 7−→ (s′j ...s′j+l−1 )

Here sj ...sj+l−1 are the symbols at the positions j, ..., j + l − 1 of an infinite sequence S ∈ AZ .
  On the other hand, the function F assigns to the finite subsequence (si , . . . , si+r−1 ) of the infinite sequence
S ∈ AZ an integer:
                                              F : Ar −→ Z.
    The generalized shift ϕ : AZ → AZ corresponding to F and G is defined as follows:
       • Compute F (S) and G(S).
       • Modify S by changing the positions in DG according to the function G(S), obtaining a new sequence S ′ .
       • Shift S ′ by F (S) positions. In other words, we obtain a new sequence s′′n = s′n+F (S) for all n ∈ Z.
                                              TOWARDS A FLUID COMPUTER                                                      5


The sequence S ′′ is then ϕ(S).

   Given a Turing machine, there is a generalized shift ϕ conjugate to it. Conjugation means that there exists an
injective map φ : P → AZ such that the global transition function of the Turing machine is given by ∆ = φ−1 ϕφ.
In fact, if the Turing machine is reversible, it can be shown that the generalized shift is bijective.

Generalized shifts and square Cantor sets. Generalized shifts are conjugate to maps of the square Cantor set C 2 :=
C × C ⊂ I 2 , where C is the (standard) Cantor ternary set in the unit interval I = [0, 1].
    Without loss of generality, we can assume A = {0, 1}. Given s = (. . . s−1 .s0 s1 . . .) ∈ AZ , we can associate to it an
explicitly constructible point in the square Cantor set. In order to do this, it is enough to express the coordinates
of the assigned point in base 3. The coordinate x corresponds to the expansion (x1 , x2 , . . .) in base 3 where xi = 0
if s−i = 0 and xi = 2 if s−i = 1. Similarly, the coordinate y corresponds to the expansion (y0 , y1 , . . .) where yi = 0
if si = 0 and yi = 2 if si = 1.
   Moore proved that any generalized shift is conjugate to the restriction on the square Cantor set of a piecewise
linear map defined on blocks of the Cantor set in I 2 . This map consists of finitely many area-preserving linear
components. If the generalized shift is bijective, then the image blocks are pairwise disjoint. An example is depicted
in Figure 4.1. Each linear component is the composition of two linear maps: a translation and a positive (or
negative) power of the horseshoe map (or the Baker’s map).




                          Figure 1. Example of a map by blocks of the square Cantor set.

   The figure above illustrates a mapping by blocks associated with a generalized shift ϕ : A → A, where the
alphabet is A = {0, 1} and both DF and DG are defined as {−1, 0}. The functions F and G are defined as follows:
                               G(0.1) = 0.1, G(1.1) = 0.0, G(0.0) = 0.1, G(1.0) = 1.1,
and
                                 F (0.1) = −1, F (1.1) = −1, F (0.0) = 0, F (1.0) = 0.
In this context, the Cantor blocks A, B, C, and D represent sequences where positions −1 and 0 respectively contain
the pairs (0.1), (1.1), (0.0), and (1.0). Their respective images are denoted as A′ , B ′ , C ′ , and D′ .

4.2. Area-preserving maps, Poincaré sections and Turing complete Reeb flows. In [8], and as suggested
by Moore [20], we proved that any bijective generalized shift can be extended to an area-preserving diffeomorphism
of the disk which is the identity near the boundary.
Proposition 4.1. For each bijective generalized shift and its associated map of the square Cantor set ϕ, there exists
a C ∞ area-preserving diffeomorphism of the disk φ : D → D which is the identity in a neighborhood of ∂D and
whose restriction to the square Cantor set is conjugate to ϕ.

   This proposition indicates that a Turing-complete bijective generalized shift, derived from a reversible universal
Turing machine, leads to the existence of a Turing-complete area-preserving diffeomorphism of the disk as shown
in [8, Theorem 5.2]. Furthermore, we prove that this diffeomorphism can be identified as the first-return map on a
disk-like Poincaré section of a Reeb field.
Theorem 4.1. Let (M, ξ) be a contact 3-manifold, and φ : D → D be an area-preserving diffeomorphism of the
disk which is the identity (in a neighborhood of ) the boundary. Then there exists a contact form α whose associated
Reeb vector field R exhibits a Poincaré section with first return map conjugate to φ. In particular, this implies the
existence of a Turing-complete Reeb field R on (M, ξ) in the sense defined in Definition 2.2.
6                            ROBERT CARDONA, EVA MIRANDA, AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS


   The final step involves assembling all the pieces of the puzzle together. Combining Proposition 4.1, Theorem 4.1
and Theorem 3.1, which establishes the correspondence between Beltrami fields and Reeb flows, we achieve the
desired result for stationary Euler flows.
Corollary 4.2. There exists an Eulerisable field X on S3 that is Turing complete. The metric g that makes X a
solution of the stationary Euler equations can be assumed to be the round metric in the complement of an embedded
solid torus. Furthermore, X admits a disk-like cross section D whose first return map is a diffeomorphism φ : D → D
which is Turing complete and the identity in a neighborhood of ∂D.

   The fact that the metric can be assumed to be the round one in the complement of an embedded solid torus
needs some explanation. When applying Theorem 4.1, we take as ambient manifold the standard contact sphere
(S3 , ξstd ). Then, the contact form whose Reeb field realizes a given area-preserving diffeomorphism of the disk as a
Poincaré map can be chosen to coincide with the standard contact form αstd outside a solid torus. To conclude, one
can check that the metric associated to α via Theorem 3.1 can be taken to be the round one whenever α coincides
with αstd .
  The metric g in Corollary 4.2 is any metric compatible with the contact form associated to the Reeb field R ≡ X
constructed in Theorem 4.1. It is natural to ask if one can choose an “optimal” metric among all compatible metrics.
To the end of defining optimal compatible metrics, Chern and Hamilton [9] introduced the functional
                                                         Z
                                                E(g) =      |LR g|2g volg
                                                         S3

on the space of compatible metrics, and considered metrics that are (local) minima of this functional, what they
called critical compatible metrics. The following proposition shows that the metric g in Corollary 4.2 cannot be
critical:
Proposition 4.3. There is no critical metric g that makes the Reeb field R from Theorem 4.1 on M = S3 a Beltrami
field.

Proof. We describe S3 as the set of points (z1 , z2 ) ∈ C2 with |z1 |2 + |z2 |2 = 1. We parametrize S3 using Hopf
coordinates
                                         (z1 , z2 ) = (cos seiϕ1 , sin seiϕ2 )
with s ∈ [0, π/2], ϕ1,2 ∈ [0, 2π).
   Assume that the Reeb field R, associated to a contact form α, admits a critical compatible metric g. Then,
according to the classification in [18], the Riemannian contact structure (S3 , α, g) is Sasakian. Sasakian structures
on S3 are very rigid and are classified, in particular Belgun showed [2, Lemma 1] that the Reeb field corresponding
to a Sasakian contact structure on S3 is orbitally conjugate to a vector field that reads in Hopf coordinates as
                                                 l∂ϕ1 + k∂ϕ2 =: Rlk
for some positive constants l, k. Taking as Poincaré section the disk D := {ϕ1 = 0}, we easily compute the first
return map to be
                                              Πlk (s, ϕ) = (s, ϕ + ω)
with ω := 2πk
            l . Πlk is a rigid rotation of frequency ω. Since the Reeb field R constructed in Corollary 4.2 has a
Poincaré map on a transverse disk that is the identity in a neighborhood of the boundary, this immediately implies
that ω = 0 mod 2π, so Πlk = id. It is obvious that the identity map cannot simulate a universal Turing machine,
so R cannot be Turing complete. This concludes the proof of the proposition.                                     □

Remark 4.4. More generally, it can be argued that a Seifert flow l∂ϕ1 + k∂ϕ2 (or a rigid rotation on a disk), cannot
be Turing complete. Suppose that given two computable sets we can determine whether they intersect (this might
not be the case if they are at distance zero, but we assume there is a black box like an oracle machine that can
determine this). Even under this assumption, the reachability problem of a Turing complete system is undecidable,
i.e., there is an exactly computable initial condition p and a computable open set U for which determining if the
positive trajectory of the system starting at p intersects U is an undecidable problem. On the other hand, for a
Seifert flow, an exactly computable initial condition belongs to a computable invariant set V : an invariant circle if
l/k is rational or an invariant torus if it is irrational. The positive trajectory of p intersects U if and only if the
intersection of U and V is non-empty, which can be determined using our black box. Thus, under the assumption
that we have access to such an oracle machine, the reachability problem is decidable, and we conclude that a Seifert
flow (and hence a rigid rotation) cannot be Turing complete.
                                             TOWARDS A FLUID COMPUTER                                                     7


        5. Constructing stationary ideal fluids that are Turing complete (construction 2)

   In the former construction of a Turing complete stationary solution of the Euler equations, the Riemannian metric
is deformed and adapted to the underlying contact geometry. These deformations are controlled using sophisticated
techniques, which can make the metric highly intricate in certain regions. The contact/hydrodynamics duet fails
when the metric is prescribed, requiring new strategies. In the standard classical formulation of the Euler equations
in 3D, the prescribed metric is the Euclidean one on R3 .
   In this section, we provide an overview of the construction in [7], where we achieve a universal Turing machine
simulated by a steady fluid flow in Euclidean 3D-space.

5.1. Statement of the theorem. The main theorem we proved in [7, Theorem 1] is the existence of Turing
complete stationary solutions to the Euler equations in R3 endowed with the Euclidean metric.
Theorem 5.1. There exists a Turing complete Beltrami field u in Euclidean space R3 .

  The strategy of the proof can be sketched as follows.
      (i) We show that there exists a Turing complete vector field X in the plane R2 that is of the form X = ∇f
          where f is a smooth function.
     (ii) Furthermore, we require that if we perturb X by an error function ε : R2 → R that decays rapidly enough
          at infinity, then we obtain a vector field that is Turing complete as well.
    (iii) We show that a vector field in R2 of the form X = ∇g, where g is an entire function, can be extended to
          a Beltrami field v in R3 such that v|z=0 = X. That is, v leaves the plane {z = 0} invariant and coincides
          with X there.
    (iv) We approximate f by an entire function F with an error that decays rapidly enough. Hence X̃ = ∇F is
          Turing complete and extends as a Beltrami field u on R3 . It easily follows that u is Turing complete as
          well.
   In the next two subsections, we outline the main steps of the proof. In the first subsection, we provide an overview
of the arguments for steps (i) and (ii). The third step utilizes a global Cauchy-Kovalevskaya theorem tailored to
the curl operator, which we elaborate on subsequently. The fourth step involves a general result concerning the
approximation of smooth functions by entire functions with errors that decay arbitrarily, as detailed in [11].

5.2. Weakly robust Turing complete gradient flow in the plane. In this subsection, we outline the construc-
tion of a Turing complete gradient flow on R2 and discuss how to ensure that its Turing completeness is robust
under perturbations that decay sufficiently fast at infinity. Following the rough idea presented in Subsection 2.2,
we will first show how to encode the configurations of a given universal Turing machine TU into R2 . Without loss
of generality, we assume that TU = (Q, Σ, q0 , qhalt , δ) with Q = {1, ..., m} for some m ∈ N and Σ = {0, 1}.

The encoding. We first construct an injective map from P = Q × A to I = [0, 1], where we recall that A is the set
of compactly supported sequences in ΣZ . Given (q, t) ∈ P, write the tape as
                                                 · · · 000t−a · · · tb 00 · · · ,
where t−a is the first negative position such that t−a = 1 and tb is the last positive position such that tb = 1. If every
symbol in a negative (or positive) position is zero, we choose a = 0 (or b = 0 respectively). Set the non-negative
integers given by concatenating the digits s := t−a · · · t−1 , r := tb · · · t0 , and introduce the map
                                                                   1
                                                   φ(q, t) := q r s ∈ (0, 1),
                                                                2 3 5
which is injective and its image accumulates at 0. There exist pairwise disjoint intervals I(q,t) centered at φ(q, t),
for instance of size 14 φ(q, t)2 . To introduce an encoding into R2 we proceed as follows. Fix ϵ > 0 small, we encode
(q, t) as the open set
                                                      ∞
                                                      [      j
                                           U(q,t) :=        I(q,t) × (k − ϵ/2, k + ϵ/2)
                                                   j,k=0
        j
where I(q,t) := I(q,t) +(2j, 2j). In other words, we are looking at any interval of the form I j,k := [2j, 2j+1]×{k} ⊂ R2 ,
with j, k ∈ N, and considering an ε-thickening of I(q,t) understood as a subset of I j,k ∼       = [0, 1]. Figure 2 gives a
visualization of part of one of the open sets U(q,t) in a region of the plane.
  The countable set of initial configurations P0 = {(q0 , t) | t ∈ A} admits a (computable) ordering which we will
not specify, so that we can write it as P0 = {ci = (q0 , ti ) | i ∈ N}. Given ci , the initial condition associated to the
8                                  ROBERT CARDONA, EVA MIRANDA, AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS



             y




            I 0,1    0
                    I(q,t) × {1}                        1
                                                       I(q,t) × {1}




                     0                                  1
                    I(q,t) × {0}        1          2   I(q,t) × {0}   3                                      x

                                                                                           j
                       Figure 2. The open set U(q,t) is the ε-thickening of the intervals I(q,t) × {k}


vector field that we will construct will be pci = (φ(ci ) + i, 0) ∈ R2 . This corresponds to the point φ(q0 , ti ) of the
copy I i,0 of the several intervals we considered.

Integral curves capturing the steps of the algorithm. Iterating the global transition function from an initial
configuration ci = (q0 , ti ) gives a countable sequence of configurations cki = (qk , tik ) = ∆k (ci ) for each k an integer
greater than 1. On each band [2i, 2i + 1] × [0, ∞), we construct a smooth curve γi such that γi ∩ {[2i, 2i + 1] × {k}}
is the point (2i + φ(qk , tik ), k), which lies in U(qk ,tik ) , see Figure 3.




                             γ0                                γ1




                    pc0 = (φ(q0 , t0 ), 0)                                    pc1 = (2 + φ(q0 , t1 ), 0)


                       Figure 3. Integral curves following the computations of the Turing machine

   We conclude by constructing a gradient field X = ∇f such that each γi is an integral curve of X. Observe now
that given an initial condition ci , the integral curve through pci will intersect sequentially the open sets U(qk ,tik ) ,
thus keeping track of the computations of the machine with initial configuration ci . One easily shows that X is
Turing complete, where to each ci we assign the initial condition pci , and the open set U for whichSthe trajectory
through ci intersects U if and only if the machine halts with initial configuration ci is simply U = t∈A U(qhalt ,t) ,
that is, every open set encoding a halting configuration.

Weak robustness and conclusion. Recall that in order to apply the Cauchy-Kovalevskaya theorem, we need X
to be the gradient of an entire function. To achieve this, we construct X in a way that the flow normally contracts
towards each curve γi at a strong enough rate, see Figure 3. This can be used to show that if we perturb X by
an error function ε(x, y) with fast decay at infinity, we obtain a vector field that is again Turing complete. This is
                                               TOWARDS A FLUID COMPUTER                                                 9


because even if the curve γi will no longer be an integral curve, the integral curve through any of the points pci of
the perturbed vector field will still intersect sequentially the open sets U(qk ,tik ) , hence capturing the computations
of the Turing machine. The fast decay of the error is necessary since the open sets U(qk ,tik ) have no uniform lower
bound on their size. This is because the intervals I(q,t) accumulate at zero, and hence their size tends to zero. One
can estimate the decay rate of the size of the open sets that need to be intersected by the curves in terms of the
distance to the origin, and hence robustness can be achieved under fast decay errors.
  The construction concludes by approximating f by an entire function F (using [11]), and applying the Cauchy-
Kovalevskaya theorem for the curl to the Cauchy datum ∇F on the plane {z = 0} (see the following subsection).

5.3. A Cauchy-Kovalevskaya theorem. The Cauchy–Kovalevskaya theorem is the main tool to establish local
existence and uniqueness for solutions to analytic partial differential equations related to Cauchy data. A Cauchy
problem involves finding the solution to a partial differential equation satisfying specific conditions on a non-
characteristic hypersurface within the domain. It applies to a wide range of PDEs as far as they admit non-
characteristic surfaces.
  Unfortunately, the curl operator has no non-characteristic surfaces. The reason is that its Fourier symbol is given
by the 3 × 3 matrix
                                                                             
                                                         0         −ξ3     ξ2
                                             µ(ξ) = i  ξ3          0     −ξ1  ,
                                                        −ξ2        ξ1      0
which is antisymmetric, so det µ(ξ) = 0 for all values (ξ1 , ξ2 , ξ3 ) ∈ R3 .
  This means that the Cauchy datum that one can prescribe on a surface cannot be arbitrary, there must be
obstructions. Indeed, taking the plane {z = 0} as the Cauchy surface, and noticing that the third component of the
Beltrami equation is:

                                              ∂u2    ∂u1
                                                   −      = λu3 ,
                                              ∂x      ∂y
if we assume that the Cauchy datum is tangent to the surface, that is u3 (x, y, 0) = 0, we easily obtain
                                             ∂u2 (x, y, 0) ∂u1 (x, y, 0)
                                                          −              = 0.
                                                  ∂x            ∂y
Therefore, if Σ = {z = 0} and the Cauchy datum is v(x, y) = v1 ∂x + v2 ∂y , a necessary condition for the local
solvability of the Beltrami equation is ∂v     ∂v2          2
                                        ∂y − ∂x = 0 on R , and this happens if and only if
                                           1



                                                             v = ∇R 2 F
for some analytic function
                                                         F : R2 → R
   In [7] we proved that the aforementioned necessary condition is also sufficient for local solvability. Moreover, using
a global version of Cauchy-Kovalevskaya due to Pongérard and Wagschal [22] we also showed that the Beltrami field
one obtains using Cauchy-Kovalevskaya is defined on the whole R3 provided that the analytic planar function F is
entire. This is the content of the following theorem:
Theorem 5.2. Let F (x, y) be an entire function (i.e., it extends as a holomorphic function on C2 ). Then for any
λ ̸= 0 there exists a unique Beltrami vector field u in R3 that solves the Cauchy problem:
                                                     
                                                         curl u = λu
                                                         u|z=0 = ∇R2 F

                                                6. Some open problems

   We conclude with a list of open problems. The first one is inspired by Etnyre and Ghrist’s observation that
there is a correspondence between Reeb fields and Beltrami flows, cf. Section 3. This connection allows one to
show that the n-body problem of celestial mechanics can be interpreted as a steady Euler flow on some Riemannian
manifold (which corresponds to positive energy levels) [13]. While the chaotic nature of several systems in celestial
mechanics has been studied by various authors (see, for instance, [1]), we are not aware of any research analyzing
the computational power of the n-body problem from the perspective of Turing machines. This leads us to consider
the following:
10                             ROBERT CARDONA, EVA MIRANDA, AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS


Open problem 1. Is the n-body problem in celestial mechanics Turing complete for some n > 2 (and some values
of masses)?

   The second problem we want to state concerns the connections between dynamical chaos and computational
power. In [4] we proved that a natural class of Turing machines (that we called “regular”), which include most of
known examples of universal Turing machines, have positive topological entropy; however, as explained in [4], there
are universal Turing machines with zero topological entropy. More refined versions of entropy in dynamical systems
are given by entropy-type invariants of subexponential growth (e.g. the polynomial entropy [16, 17, 14]) that may
be non-vanishing even for systems with zero topological entropy. For a recent comprehensive account on the subject
see [15]. It is then natural to ask the following:
Open problem 2. Given a universal Turing machine, is there some polynomial (or subexponential growth) entropy
which is positive?

   The constructions in this article are either Turing complete for a non-prescribed metric on a compact manifold
or Turing complete for the fixed Euclidean metric on R3 . The following question remains unanswered:
Open problem 3. Does there exist a Turing complete stationary Euler flow on (S3 , ground ) or (T3 , gf lat )?

  To finish the list of open problems, we want to emphasize that our constructions explained above yield Turing
complete solutions to the stationary Euler equations, so ideal fluid flows. It is natural to ask if our techniques can
be applied to construct stationary solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations that are Turing complete. Since it is
impossible [3] to construct Turing-complete systems on compact spaces that are robust under perturbations, this
means that adding viscosity to the system can destroy its computational power. This leads to the problem:
Open problem 4. Does there exist a Turing complete steady Navier-Stokes flow on some compact Riemannian
3-manifold?
Remark 6.1. Analogously to the Euler equations it is possible to define Navier-Stokes on general Riemannian
manifolds (where the dissipative term of the equations is modelled by the Hodge Laplacian associated to the
Riemannian structure).

                                                           References
 1. I. Baldomá, M. Giralt and M. Guardia. Coorbital homoclinic and chaotic dynamics in the Restricted 3-Body Problem. Preprint
    arXiv:2312.13819, 2023.
 2. F. Belgun. Normal CR structures on S3 . Math. Z. 244 (2003) 125–151.
 3. O. Bournez, D.S. Graca, E. Hainry. Computation with perturbed dynamical systems. J. Comput. Sys. Sci. 79 (2013) 714–724.
 4. R. Bruera, R. Cardona, E. Miranda, D. Peralta-Salas. Topological entropy of Turing complete dynamics, Preprint arXiv:2404.07288
    (2024).
 5. R. Cardona, E. Miranda, D. Peralta-Salas. Turing universality of the incompressible Euler equations and a conjecture of Moore. Int.
    Math. Res. Not. 2022 (2022) 18092–18109.
 6. R. Cardona, E. Miranda, D. Peralta-Salas, F. Presas. Universality of Euler flows and flexibility of Reeb embeddings. Adv. Math. 428
    (2023), Paper No. 109142, 40 pp.
 7. R. Cardona, E. Miranda, D. Peralta-Salas. Computability and Beltrami fields in Euclidean space. J. Math. Pures Appl. 169 (2023)
    50–81.
 8. R. Cardona, E. Miranda, D. Peralta-Salas, F. Presas. Constructing Turing complete Euler flows in dimension 3. Proc. Natl. Acad.
    Sci. 2021, 118 (19) e2026818118.
 9. S.S. Chern, R. Hamilton. On Riemannian metrics adapted to three-dimensional contact manifolds. With an appendix by Alan
    Weinstein. Lecture Notes in Math. 1111, Workshop Bonn 1984, 279–308, Springer, Berlin, 1985.
10. T. Cubitt, D. Perez-Garcia, M. Wolf. Undecidability of the spectral gap. Nature 528 (2015) 207–211.
11. E.M. Frih, P.M. Gauthier. Approximation of a function and its derivatives by entire functions of several variables. Canad. Math.
    Bull. 31 (1988) 495–499.
12. J. Etnyre, R. Ghrist. Contact topology and hydrodynamics I. Beltrami fields and the Seifert conjecture. Nonlinearity 13 441–458
    (2000).
13. J. Fontana-McNally, E. Miranda and D. Peralta-Salas. An equivariant Reeb-Beltrami correspondence and the Kepler-Euler flow ,
    Proc. R. Soc. A. 480 (2024), no. 2282, Paper No. 20230499, 16 pp.
14. L. Hauseux and F. Frédéric. Entropie polynomiale des homéomorphismes de Brouwer. Ann. H. Lebesgue 2 (2019), 39–57.
15. A. Kanigowski, A. Katok, D. Wei. Survey on entropy-type invariants of subexponential growth in dynamical systems. In “A Vision
    for Dynamics in the 21st Century, The Legacy of Anatole Katok”, pp. 232–289, Cambridge Univ. Press, 2024.
16. A. G. Kušnirenko. Metric invariants of entropy type. Uspehi Mat. Nauk 22(1967), no.5, 57–65.
17. J.P. Marco. Polynomial entropies and integrable Hamiltonian systems. Regul. Chaotic Dyn. 18(2013), no.6, 623–655.
18. Y. Mitsumatsu, D. Peralta-Salas, R. Slobodeanu. On the existence of critical compatible metrics on contact 3-manifolds. Preprint
    arXiv:2311.15833 (2023).
19. C. Moore. Undecidability and Unpredictability in Dynamical Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 (1990) 2354–2357.
20. C. Moore. Generalized shifts: unpredictability and undecidability in dynamical systems. Nonlinearity 4 199–230 (1991).
                                                  TOWARDS A FLUID COMPUTER                                                          11


21. R. Penrose. The emperor’s new mind. Concerning computers, minds, and the laws of physics. With a foreword by Martin Gardner.
    The Clarendon Press, Oxford University Press, New York, 1989. xiv+466 pp. ISBN: 0-19-851973-7
22. P. Pongérard, C. Wagschal. Probléme de Cauchy dans des espaces de fonctions entieres. J. Math. Pures Appl. 75 (1996) 409-418.
23. J.H. Reif. J.D. Tygar, A. Yoshida. Computability and complexity of ray tracing. Discrete Comput. Geom. 11 (1994) 265–288.
24. H.T. Siegelmann, E.D. Sontag. On the computational power of neural nets. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 50 (1995) 132–150.
25. T. Tao. Finite time blowup for an averaged three-dimensional Navier-Stokes equation. J. Amer. Math. Soc. 29 (2016), no. 3, 601-674.
26. T. Tao. On the universality of potential well dynamics. Dyn. PDE 14 219–238 (2017).
27. T. Tao. Searching for singularities in the Navier-Stokes equations. Nature Reviews Physics 1 418–419 (2019).
28. A. M. Turing. On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem. Proceedings of the London Mathematical
    Society. 2 (1937) 42: 230-265

   Robert Cardona, Departament de Matemàtiques i Informàtica, Universitat de Barcelona, Gran Via de les Corts
Catalanes 585, 08007 Barcelona, Spain
e-mail: robert.cardona@ub.edu

   Eva Miranda, Laboratory of Geometry and Dynamical Systems & Institut de Matemàtiques de la UPC-BarcelonaTech
(IMTech), Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Avinguda del Doctor Marañon 44-50, 08028, Barcelona, CRM Centre
de Recerca Matemàtica, Campus de Bellaterra Edifici C, 08193 Bellaterra, Barcelona e-mail: eva.miranda@upc.edu

  Daniel Peralta-Salas, Instituto de Ciencias Matemáticas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientı́ficas, 28049
Madrid, Spain. e-mail: dperalta@icmat.es
