                                          On large girth regular graphs and random processes on trees

                                                                        Ágnes Backhausz          Balázs Szegedy
                                           MTA A LFR ÉD R ÉNYI I NSTITUTE OF M ATHEMATICS . Reáltanoda utca 13–15., Budapest, Hungary, H-1053




arXiv:1406.4420v2 [math.PR] 27 Jul 2015
                                                      backhausz.agnes@renyi.mta.hu, szegedy.balazs@renyi.mta.hu

                                                                                    October 2, 2018


                                                                                          Abstract

                                              We study various classes of random processes defined on the regular tree Td that are invariant
                                           under the automorphism group of Td . Most important ones are factor of i.i.d. processes (randomized
                                           local algorithms), branching Markov chains and a new class that we call typical processes. Using
                                           Glauber dynamics on processes we give a sufficient condition for a branching Markov chain to be
                                           factor of i.i.d. Typical processes are defined in a way that they create a correspondence principle
                                           between random d-reguar graphs and ergodic theory on Td . Using this correspondence principle
                                           together with entropy inequalities for typical processes, we prove that there are no approximative
                                           covering maps from random d-regular graphs to d-regular weighted graphs.

                                           Keywords.      Entropy, factor of i.i.d., Glauber dynamics, graphing, local algorithm, local-global
                                           convergence, random d-regular graph.



                                           1 Introduction
                                           Fürstenberg’s correspondence principle creates a fruitful link between finite combinatorics and er-
                                           godic theory. It connects additive combinatorics with the study of shift invariant measures on the
                                           Cantor set {0, 1}Z. In particular it leads to various strengthenings and generalizations of Szemerédi’s
                                           celebrated theorem on arithmetic progressions.
                                              The goal of this paper is to study a similar correspondence principle between finite large girth
                                           d-regular graphs and Aut(Td ) invariant probability measures on F V (Td ) where F is a finite set and
                                           Td is the d-regular tree with vertex set V (Td ). The case d = 2 is basically classical ergodic theory
                                           however the case d ≥ 3 is much less developed.
                                              Our approach can be summarized as follows. Assume that G is a d-regular graph of girth g.
                                           We think of d as a fixed number (say 10) and g as something very large. We wish to scan the large


                                                                                              1
scale structure of G in the following way. We put a coloring f : V (G) → F on the vertices of G
with values in a finite set F . (It does not have to be a proper coloring i.e. neighboring vertices can
have identical color.) Then we look at the colored neighborhoods (of bounded radius) of randomly
chosen points v ∈ V (G). By this sampling we obtain a probability distribution on F -colored
(bounded) trees that carries valuable information on the global structure of G. For example, if there
is a coloring f : V (G) → {0, 1} such that, with high probability, a random vertex v has a color
different from its neighbours, then G is essentially bipartite.
   It turns out to be very convenient to regard the information obtained from a specific coloring as
an approximation of a probability measure on F V (Td ) that is invariant under Aut(Td ). This can be
made precise by using Benjamini–Schramm limits of colored graphs (see Section 2, or [7] for the
original formulation). We will use the following definition.

Definition 1.1 Let S = {Gi }∞
                            i=1 be a sequence of d-regular graphs. We say that S is a large girth

sequence if for every ε > 0 there is an index n such that for every i ≥ n the probability that a
random vertex in Gi is contained in a cycle of length at most ⌈1/ε⌉ is at most ε.

Definition 1.2 Let S = {Gi }∞
                            i=1 be a large girth sequence of d-regular graphs, and F a finite

set. We denote by [S]F the set of Aut(Td ) invariant probability measures on F V (Td ) that arise as
Benjamini–Schramm limits of F -colorings {fi : V (Gi ) → F }∞
                                                            i=1 of S. We denote by [S] the set
S
 n∈N [S]{1,2,...,n} .


   It is clear that if S ′ is a subsequence of S, then [S] ⊆ [S ′ ]. If [S] = [S ′ ] holds for every
subsequence S ′ of S, then S is called local-global convergent (see Subsection 2.1 and [31]). Local-
global convergent sequences of graphs have limit objects in the form of a graphing [31]. For a
convergent sequence S the set [S] carries important information on the structure of the graphs in S.
   We call a process µ universal if µ ∈ [S] for every large girth sequence S. Universality means,
roughly speaking, that it defines a structure that is universally present in every large girth d-regular
graph. Weakening the notion of universality, we call a process µ typical if µ ∈ [{Gni }∞
                                                                                       i=1 ] holds
                                                                  ∞
with probability 1 for some fixed sequence {ni }∞
                                                i=1 , where {Gni }i=1 is a sequence of independently

and uniformly chosen random d-regular graphs with |V (Gni )| = ni . We will see that understanding
typical processes is basically equivalent with understanding the large scale structure of random d-
regular graphs. More precisely, we will formulate a correspondence principle (see Subsection 2.1)
between the properties of random d-regular graphs and typical processes.

   Among universal processes, factor of i.i.d processes on Td (see [40] and the references therein)
have a distinguished role because of their close connection to local algorithms [25, 31, 35]. They
can be used to give estimates for various structures (such as large independent sets [14, 30, 32, 47],
matchings [15, 41], subgraphs of large girth [24, 35], etc., see also [28]) in d-regular graphs. On the
other hand, [5] characterizes the covariance structure of weak limits of factor of i.i.d. processes and

                                                   2
thus it gives a necessary condition for a process to be factor of i.i.d. However, there are only few
general and widely applicable sufficient conditions. This is a difficult question even for branching
Markov processes that are important in statistical physics (e.g. Ising model, Potts model). In Section
3 we give a Dobsrushin-type sufficient condition for a branching Markov chain to be factor of
i.i.d. We use standard methods from statistical physics, in particular, a heat-bath version of Glauber
dynamics. The idea behind this goes back to Ornstein and Weiss: sufficient conditions for fast
mixing of Glauber dynamics often imply that the process is factor of i.i.d. See also the paper of
Häggström, Jonasson and Lyons [29]. We will see that the necessary condition on the covariance
structure given in [5] is not sufficient for a branching Markov chain to be factor of i.i.d. To show
this, we use our necessary conditions for typical processes (Section 4), which automatically apply
for factor of i.i.d. processes.

    Our paper is built up as follows. In the first part we summarize various known and new facts
about factor of i.i.d, universal and typical processes, local-global convergence and graphings. More-
over, in this part, we formulate our correspondence principle between typical processes and random
d-regular graphs. In Section 3 we focus more on branching Markov chains on Td . We give a
Dobrushin-type sufficient condition for a branching Markov chain to be factor of i.i.d. In the last
part (Section 4) we give necessary conditions for a process to be typical using joint entropy func-
tions. We will see that this result implies necessary conditions on the large scale structure of random
d-regular graphs. (Note that our entropy method is closely related to the F-invariant, introduced by
Lewis Bowen [12] in ergodic theory, and also to the ideas developed by Molloy and Reed [45] to
study random d-regular graphs in combinatorics.) In particular, we prove that the value distribu-
tions of eigenvectors of random d-regular graphs can not be concentrated around boundedly many
values (this is even true for approximative eigenvectors). Moreover, we show that random d-regular
graphs do not cover bounded d-regular weighted graphs (for precise formulation, see Theorem 6).
These results are closely related to the papers of Molloy and Reed [45] about dominating ratio and
Bollobás [10] about independence numbers.



2 Invariant processes
Let Td be the (infinite) d-regular tree with vertex set V (Td ) and edge set E(Td ). Let M be a
topological space. We denote by Id (M ) the set of M -valued random processes on the d-regular
tree Td that are invariant under automorphisms of Td . More precisely, Id (M ) is the set of Aut(Td )
invariant Borel probability measures on the space M V (Td ) . (If Ψ ∈ Aut(Td ), then Ψ induces a map
naturally from M V (Td ) to itself: given a labelling of the vertices of Td , the new label of a vertex is
the label of its inverse image at Ψ. The probability measures should be invariant with respect to this
induced map.) The set Id (M ) possesses a topological structure; namely the restriction of the weak


                                                    3
topology for probability measures on M V (Td ) to Id (M ). Note that most of the time in this paper M
is a finite set. We denote by Id the set of invariant processes on Td with finitely many values.
   Let Td∗ denote the rooted d-regular tree: it is Td with a distinguished vertex o, which is called
                                                          ∗
the root. Let N be a topological space and f : M V (Td ) → N be a Borel measurable function that
is invariant under Aut(Td∗ ), which is the set of root-preserving automorphisms of Td∗ . For every
µ ∈ Id (M ) the function f defines a new process ν ∈ Id (N ) by evaluating f simultaneously at
every vertex v (by placing the root on v) on a µ-random element in M V (Td ) . We say that ν is a
factor of µ.
   A possible way to get processes in Id goes through Benjamini–Schramm limits. For the general
definition see [7]. We will use and formulate it for colored large-girth graph sequences, as follows.
Let F be a finite set. Assume that {Gi }∞
                                        i=1 is a large girth sequence of d-regular graphs. Let

{fi : V (Gi ) → F }∞
                   i=1 be a sequence of colorings of Gi . For every pair of numbers r, i ∈ N we

define the probability distribution µr,i concentrated on rooted F -colored finite graphs as follows.
We pick a random vertex v ∈ V (Gi ) and then we look at the neighborhood Nr (v) of radius r of
v (rooted by v) together with the coloring fi restricted to Nr (v). The colored graphs (Gi , fi ) are
Benjamini–Schramm convergent if for every r ∈ N the sequence {µr,i }∞
                                                                    i=1 weakly converges to
                                                                              ∗
some measure µr . The limit object is the probability measure µ on F V (Td ) with the property that
the marginal of µ in the neighborhood of radius r of the root is µr . It is easy to see that the measure
we get from µ by forgetting the root is in Id (F ).
   We list various classes of invariant processes on Td that are related to large girth sequences of
finite graphs.

Factor of i.i.d. processes: Let µ ∈ Id ([0, 1]) be the uniform distribution on [0, 1]V (Td ) , which is
the product measure of the uniform distributions on the interval [0, 1]. A factor of i.i.d. process is a
factor of the process µ. Let Fd denote the set of such processes in Id . See Lemma 3.1 for an easy
example producing independent sets as factor of i.i.d. processes.

Local processes: We say that a process is local if it is in the closure of factor of i.i.d processes in
the weak topology. Let Ld denote the set of such processes in Id .

Universal processes: A process µ ∈ Id is called universal if µ ∈ [S] holds for every large girth
sequence S of d-regular graphs. We denote the set of such processes by Ud .

Typical processes: A process µ ∈ Id is called typical if µ ∈ [{Gni }∞
                                                                    i=1 ] holds with probability 1
                                               ∞
for some fixed sequence {ni }∞
                             i=1 , where {Gni }i=1 is a sequence of independently chosen uniform

random d-regular graphs with |V (Gni )| = ni . We denote the set of typical processes by Rd .




                                                      4
Lemma 2.1 We have the follwing containments:


                                        Fd ⊆ Ld ⊆ Ud ⊆ Rd .

Proof. The first and last containments are trivial. The containment Ld ⊆ Ud is easy to see. For a
proof we refer to [31] where a much stronger theorem is proved.                                       

    We also know by recent results of Gamarnik and Sudan [25] and Rahman and Virág [47] that
Ld 6= Rd for sufficiently large d. Their result implies that the indicator function of a maximal
independent set (a set of vertices that does not contain any neighbors) in a random d-regular graph is
not in Ld (that is, the largest independent set can not be approximated with factor of i.i.d. processes);
on the other hand, it is in Rd .
    It is sometimes useful to consider variants of Fd , Ld , Ud and Rd where the values are in an infi-
nite topological space N . The definitions can be easily modified using the extension of Benjamini–
Schramm limits to colored graphs where the colors are in a topological space. We denote by
Fd (N ), Ld (N ), Ud (N ) and Rd (N ) the corresponding set of processes. Using this notation, it was
proved in [30] that Fd (R) 6= Ld (R). In that paper Harangi and Virág used random Gaussian wave
functions [20] to show this. See also Corollary 3.3. in the paper of Lyons [40]: it provides a
discrete-valued example for a process in Ld ({0, 1}) \ Ud ({0, 1}).

    The following question remains after these results.

Question 1 Is it true that Ud = Ld ? Is it true that Ud = Rd ?


    It is an important goal of this paper to give sufficient conditions (for particular models) and
necessary conditions for processes to be in one of the above classes. A recent result [5] in this
direction is the following.

Theorem 1 Let µ ∈ Ld (R) and let v, w ∈ V (Td ) be two vertices of distance k. Let f : Td → R be
a µ-random function. Then the correlation of f (v) and f (w) is at most (k + 1 − 2k/d)(d − 1)−k/2.

    Note that the statement also holds for processes in Rd ; however the proof of that extension uses
the very hard theorem of J. Friedman [22] on the second eigenvalue of random d-regular graphs.
There are various examples showing that the condition of Theorem 1 is not sufficient. We also give
a family of such examples using branching Markov processes (see Theorem 5). Branching Markov
processes will play an important role in this paper so we give a brief description of them.

Branching Markov processes: Now choose M to be a finite state space S with the discrete topol-
ogy. Let Q be the transition matrix of a reversible Markov chain on the state space S. Choose the
state of the root uniformly at random. Then make random steps according to the transition matrix Q


                                                   5
to obtain the states of the neighbors of the root. These steps are made conditionally independently,
given the state of the root. Continue this: given the state of a vertex at distance k from the root,
choose the states of its neighbors which are at distance k + 1 from the root conditionally indepen-
dently and according to the transition matrix Q. It is easy to see that reversibility implies that the
distribution of the collection of the random variables we get is invariant, hence the distribution of
the branching Markov process (which will be denoted by νQ ) is in Id (S).
    In the particular case when there is a fixed probability of staying at a given state, and another
fixed probability of transition between distinct states, the branching Markov process is identical to
the Potts model on the tree and for |S| = 2 we get the Ising model. See e.g. [21, 49] for the
description of the connection of the parameters of the two models.


2.1 Correspondence between typical processes and random d-regular graphs

Typical processes might be of interest on their own, being the processes that can be modelled on
random d-regular graphs. In addition to this, we can go in the other direction. As we will see later,
results on typical processes imply statements for random d-regular graphs. In the last section, based
on entropy estimates we give necessary conditions for an invariant process to be typical. In this
section we show how these results can be translated to statements about random d-regular graphs.
We will present a correspondence principle between these objects.


2.1.1   Local-global convergence and metric

When we want to study the correspondence between typical processes (which are defined on the
vertex set of the d-regular tree) and random d-regular graphs, another notion of convergence of
bounded degree graphs will be useful. In this subsection we briefly resume the concept of local-
global convergence (also called colored neighborhood convergence) based on the papers of Bollobás
and Riordan [11] (where this notion was introduced) and Hatami, Lovász and Szegedy [31].
    In the beginning of this section, we defined the notion of local (Benjamini–Schramm) conver-
gence of bounded degree graphs. However, we need a finer convengence notion that captures more
of the global structure than local convergence. Recall that if F is a finite set (colors) and G is a finite
graph with some f : V (G) → F , then by picking a random vertex v ∈ V (G) and looking at its
neighborhood Nr (v) of radius r, we get a probability distribution µr,G,f , which is concentrated on
rooted F -colored finite graphs. (These distributions are called the local statistics of the coloring f .)
Let [k] = {1, . . . , k}, and we define

                                 Qr,G,k = {µr,G,f |f : V (G) → [k]}.

    Let U r,k be the set of triples (H, o, f ) where (H, o) is a rooted graph of radius at most r and
f : V (H) → [k] is a coloring of its vertices with (at most) k colors. Let M(U r,k ) be the set of prob-

                                                    6
ability measures on U r,k . With this notation, we have that Qr,G,k ⊆ M(U r,k ). The space M(U r,k )
is a compact metric space equipped with the total variation distance of probability measures:

                                dT V (µ, ν) = sup |µ(A) − ν(A)|.
                                               A⊆U r,k

   (Note that we will use an equivalent definition of total variation distance later in this paper.)

Definition 2.1 (Local-global convergence, [31].) A sequence of finite graphs (Gn )∞
                                                                                  n=1 with uni-

form degree bound d is locally-globally convergent if for every r, k ≥ 1, the sequence (Qr,Gn ,k )
converges in the Hausdorff distance inside the compact metric space (M(U r,k ), dT V ).

   For every locally-globally convergent sequence (Gn ) of bounded degree graphs there is a limit
object called graphing such that the sets of local statistics of Gn converge to the local stastics of the
limit object; see Theorem 3.2 of [31] for the precise statement, and e.g. [3, 5, 19] for more about
graphings.
   The following metrization of local-global convergence was defined by Bollobás and Riordan
[11].

Definition 2.2 (Colored neighborhood metric, [11]) Let G, G′ be finite graphs. Their colored
neighborhood distance is the following:
                                          ∞ X
                                          X ∞
                                      ′
                         dCN (G, G ) =              2−k−r dH (Qr,G,k , Qr,G′ ,k ),                     (1)
                                          k=1 r=1

where dH denotes the Hausdorff distance of sets in the compact metric space (M(U r,k ), dT V ).

   Let Xd be the set of all finite graphs with maximum degree at most d. It is clear from the
definition that every sequence in Xd contains a locally-globally convergent subsequence [31]. It
follows that the completion Xd of the metric space (Xd , dCN ) is a compact metric space. It was
proved in [31] that the elements of Xd can be represented by certain measurable graphs called
graphings.

Definition 2.3 (Graphing, [31].) Let Ω be a Polish topological space and let ν be a probability
measure on the Borel sets in X. A graphing is a graph G on V (G) = Ω with Borel measureable
edge set E(G) ⊂ Ω × Ω in which all degrees are at most d and
                            Z                    Z
                               e(x, B)dν(x) =       e(x, A)dν(x)
                                  A                      B

for all measurable sets A, B ⊂ Ω, where e(x, S) is the number of edges from x ∈ Ω to S ⊆ Ω.

If G is graphing, then Qr,G,k makes sense with the additional condition that the coloring f : Ω → [k]
is measurable. Hence local-global convergence and metric both extend to graphings.



                                                     7
   We will need the following two lemmas about the metric dCN . We remark that for sake of
simplicity we will use the notion of random d-regular graphs with n vertices in the sequel without
any restriction on d and n. If d and n are both odd, then there are no such graphs. We will formulate
the statements such that they trivially hold for the empty set as well.

Lemma 2.2 For all d ≥ 1 and ε > 0 there exists F (ε) such that for all n ≥ 1 in the set of d-regular
graphs with n vertices endowed with dCN there exist an ε-net of size at most F (ε).

Proof. Using compactness, we can choose an ε/2-net N in the space (Xd , dCN ). We show that
F (ε) := |N | is a good choice. Let N ′ be the subset of N consisting of points x such that the ball of
radius ε/2 around x contains a d-regular graph with n vertices. To each element in N ′ we assign a
d-regular graph with n vertices of distance at most ε/2. It is clear that set of these graphs have the
desired properties.                                                                                  

Lemma 2.3 For all δ > 0 there exists i0 such that for all i ≥ i0 and graphs G1 , G2 ∈ Xd both on
the vertex set [i] and |E(G1 )△E(G2 )| = 1 satisfy dCN (G1 , G2 ) ≤ δ.

Proof. Since the sum of the weights is finite in (1), and the all the Hausdorff distances are at most
1, it is enough to prove the statement for a single term. Let us fix k and r. Let µr,G1 ,f ∈ Qr,G1 ,k be
an arbitrary element corresponding to a coloring f : [i] → [k]. It is enough to prove that the total
variation distance of µr,G1 ,f and µr,G2 ,f can be bounded from above by a quantity depending only
on i and tending to zero as i goes to ∞. Let e be the only edge in E(G1 )△E(G2 ). In both G1 and
G2 there are boundedly many vertices v such that e intersects the neighborhood of radius r of v. It
is easy to see that 2(d + 1)r is such a bound. The colored neighborhoods of the rest of the vertices
are the same in G1 and G2 . It follows that the total variation distance of µr,G1 ,f and µr,G2 ,f is at
most 2(d + 1)r /i. This completes the proof.                                                         


2.1.2     Typical processes

In this section we prove a correspondence principle between typical processes and random d-regular
graphs.
   Throughout this section, d ≥ 3 will be fixed, and Gn will be a uniformly chosen random d-
regular graph on n vertices.

Lemma 2.4 For fixed d ≥ 3 there is a sequence {Bn }∞
                                                   n=1 of d-regular graphs with |V (Bn )| = n

such that dCN (Bn , Gn ) tends to 0 in probability as n → ∞.

Proof.    Given ε > 0, for all n ≥ 1, by using Lemma 2.2, we choose an ε/4-net Nn of size at
most F (ε/4) in the set of d-regular graphs with n vertices with respect to the colored neighborhood



                                                   8
metric. (We emphasize that the size of the net does not depend on the number of vertices of the
graph.) For each n, let Bn,ε ∈ Nn be a (deterministic) d-regular graph on vertices such that

                                                                  1
                               P(dCN (Bn,ε , Gn ) ≤ ε/4) ≥             ,                          (2)
                                                               F (ε/4)

where Gn is a uniform random d-regular graph on n vertices. Such a Bn,ε must exist according to
the definition of the ε/4-net Nn .
   We define fn,ε (Hn ) = dCN (Bn,ε , Hn ) for d-regular graphs Hn on n vertices. By Lemma 2.3,
if n ≥ n0 with some fixed n0 , then fn,ε is a Lipschitz function with δ. By well-known concentration
inequalities (based on the exploration process and Azuma’s inequality on martingales, see e.g. [4,
Chapter 7], this implies the following. For all η > 0 there exists n1 = n1 (η) such that

                       P(|fn,ε (Gn ) − E(fn,ε (Gn ))| > η) ≤ η        (n ≥ n1 ).                  (3)

By choosing 0 < η < min(ε/4, 1/F (ε/4)), inequalities (2) and (3) together imply E(fn,ε (Gn )) ≤
ε/2 (n ≥ n1 ). That is, since fn,ε is concentrated around its expectation (due to its Lipschitz
property) for large n, and Gn is close to some fixed graph with probability with a positive lower
bound not depending on n, we conclude that this expectation has to be small for n large enough.
   Putting this together, this yields

                 P(fn,ε (Gn ) > ε) = P(dCN (Bn,ε , Gn ) > ε) ≤ ε           (n ≥ n(ε)).

   By a standard diagonalization argument, let k(n) = max{k | n(1/k) < n} and Bn = Bn,1/k(n) .
It is clear by the last inequality that {Bn }∞
                                             n=1 satisfies the requirement.                        

Proposition 2.1 For all infinite S ⊆ N there exists an infinite S ′ ⊆ S and a graphing G ∈ Xd
such that if (Gi )i∈S ′ is a sequence of independent d-regular random graphs with |V (Gi )| = i, then
(Gi )i∈S ′ locally-globally converges to the graphing G with probability 1.

Proof. First, based on Lemma 2.4, we can choose S1 ⊆ S such that {dCN (Bn , Gn )}n∈S1 tends to
0 with probability 1. On the other hand, by compactness, there is an infinite subsequence S ′ ⊆ S1
such that {Bn }n∈S ′ is locally-globally convergent. Let G be its limit. This completes the proof. 

   Graphings arising as the local-global limits of sequences of random graphs – like in Proposi-
tion 2.1 – play an important role when we are dealing with random d-regular graphs and typical
processes.

Definition 2.4 A graphing G ∈ Xd is called typical if there exists an infinite S ′ ⊆ N such that if
{Gi }i∈S ′ is a sequence of independent d-regular random graphs with |V (Gi )| = i, then {Gi }i∈S ′
locally-globally converges to G with probability 1.




                                                   9
   We conjecture that (with respect to local-global equivalence) there is a unique typical graphing.
To put it in another way, the almost sure limit of sequences of random regular graphs does not
depend on the sequence of the number of vertices. More precisely, the conjecture is the following.
If G and G ′ are both typical graphings, then G and G ′ are locally-globally equivalent (i.e. their local-
global distance is 0). This is essentially saying that a growing sequence of random d-regular graphs
is convergent in probability. Deep results in favour of this conjecture were established by Bayati,
Gamarnik and Tetali [6]. They proved the convergence in probability of various graph parameters,
e.g. the independence ratio. Note that the paper [31] has a formally stronger conjecture, which states
convergence with probability 1.

   We will need the following fact, which would also trivially follow from this conjecture.

Lemma 2.5 The set of typical graphings is closed within the local-global topology in Xd .


Proof. Let {Gn }∞
                n=1 be a sequence of typical graphings converging locally-globally to G. We can
            P∞
assume that n=1 dCN (Gn , G) is finite. By definition, for every i ∈ N there is an infinite set Si
such that {Gn }n∈Si converges to G with probability 1. Choose ji ∈ Si such that
                                      ∞
                                      X
                                            E(dCN (Gji , Gi )) < ∞.
                                      i=1

Using triangle inequality and our assumption on the seqence {Gi }, we may replace Gi by G, and the
sum remains finite. This shows that the sequence of independent random graphs {Gi }∞
                                                                                   i=1 locally-

globally converges to G with probability 1, and hence G is a typical graphing.                         

   Our goal is to understand the consequences of results on typical processes for random d-regular
graphs. In order to do this, we recall that there is a connection between d-regular graphings and
invariant processes on the d-regular tree [5, 31], with the property that typical graphings correspond
to typical processes. Suppose that G is a d-regular graphing. Moreover, suppose that the vertices of
G are colored with a finite color set S in a measurable way. Then choose a random vertex of G and
map the rooted d-regular tree into G by a random graph covering such that the root is mapped to the
chosen vertex. By assigning to each vertex of the d-regular tree the color of its image in G, we get
a random coloring of Td∗ . This way we get a random invariant process on Td∗ . Now we consider all
the processes that can be obtained from G with an S-coloring. We denote by γ(G, S) the closure of
this set in the weak topology. Note that γ(G, S) is invariant with respect to local-global equivalence
of graphings.
   It follows immediately from the definition that if the graphing G is typical and S is an arbi-
trary finite set, then all processes in γ(G, S) are typical. Furthermore, every typical process can be
obtained this way. By Lemma 2.5 we get the next corollary.




                                                    10
Lemma 2.6 For every fixed d and finite set S, the set of typical processes with values in S is closed
with respect to the weak topology.

   Now we are ready to prove the following correspondence principle between random graphs and
typical graphings.

Proposition 2.2 Let (Gi )i∈N be a sequence of independent random d-regular graphs with the num-
ber of vertices tending to infinity. Let C be a closed subset of Xd with respect to the local-global
topology. Suppose that C does not contain any typical graphings. Then P (Gi ∈ C) → 0 as i → ∞.

Proof. Assume that S = {i ∈ N : P (Gi ∈ C) > ε} is infinite for some ε > 0. Choose S ′ ⊆ S by
Proposition 2.1; that is, (Gi )i∈S ′ locally-globally converges to a fixed graphing G with probability 1.
On the other hand, by independence, it follows that with probability 1 we have Gi ∈ C for infinitely
many i ∈ S ′ . Since C is closed in the local-global topology, and G is the limit of the whole sequence
almost surely, this implies that G has to be in C. But, by definition, G is typical. This contradicts
our assumption on C.                                                                                  

   The main application of Proposition 2.2 is that we can turn statements about typical processes
into statements about random d-regular graphs. As we have explained before, typical processes
are exactly the processes coming from typical graphings. Therefore if we succeed in excluding
typical processes from a closed set within the weak topology of invariant processes, then at the
same time we exclude typical graphings from a closed set within the local-global topology, and
through Proposition 2.2 we obtain a result for random d-regular graphs. We will demonstrate this
principle on concrete examples in Section 4.2.


2.2 Joinings and related metric

An invariant coupling, or shortly joining, of two elements µ, ν ∈ Id (M ) is a process ψ ∈ Id (M ×
M ) such that the two marginal processes of ψ (with respect to the first and second coordinate in
M × M ) are µ and ν. We denote by C(µ, ν) the set of all joinings of µ and ν.
   Assume that the topology on M is given by a metric m : M × M → R+ ∪ {0}. Then we define
a distance mc on Id (M ) in the following way.

                                  mc (µ, ν) =     inf      E(m(ψ|v )),                               (4)
                                                ψ∈C(µ,ν)

where v is an arbitrary fixed vertex of Td and ψ|v is the restriction of ψ to v. Note that automorphism
invariance implies that mc does not depend on the choice of v. If M has finite diameter, then
mc (µ, ν) is a finite number bounded by this diameter.
                                ¯
   This is basically Ornstein’s d-metric, which was originally defined for Z-invariant processes, see
e.g. [27]. See also the recent papers of Lyons and Thom [40, 42] where several results and open
questions on Td are presented, connecting the factor of i.i.d. processes to this metric.

                                                   11
   The key to the proof of the fact that this is a metric is the notion of relatively independent
joining [27, Chapter 15, Section 7]. Assume that ψ1,2 ∈ C(µ1 , µ2 ) and ψ2,3 ∈ C(µ2 , µ3 ). Let
us consider the unique joining of ψ1,2 and ψ2,3 that identifies the marginal µ2 and has the property
that µ1 and µ3 are conditionally independent with respect to µ2 . We remark that using relatively
independent joinings and some kind of Borel–Cantelli arguments one can check that the space of
                                                    ¯
invariant processes is complete with respect to the d-metric.
   The case when M is a finite set plays a special role in our paper. In this case we define m(x, y) =
1 if x 6= y and m(x, x) = 0 for x, y ∈ M . The corresponding metric mc is regarded as the Hamming
distance for processes in Id (M ).



3 Glauber dynamics and branching Markov processes
Glauber dynamics is an important tool in statistical physics. In this chapter we consider a vari-
ant of heat-bath Glauber dynamics that is an mc -continuous transformation on Id (M ). We begin
with the finite case, then we define the Dobrushin coefficient, and formulate the main results: a
Dobrushin-type sufficient condition for branching Markov chains to be factor of i.i.d. Then we give
a brief description of the Poisson Glauber dynamics that seems to be the closest analogy to classical
Glauber dynamics, and we define something similar, that is more technical, but more useful in our
applications.


3.1 Glauber dynamics on finite graphs

First suppose that G is a (potentially infinite) d-regular graph, and we have a reversible Markov
chain with finite state space S and transition matrix Q. We think of G such that each vertex has a
state from S; the state of the graph is an element in S V (G) . A Glauber step at vertex v ∈ V (G) is
a way of generating a random state from a given state of the graph. We do this by randomizing the
state of v conditionally on the states of its neighbors, as follows.
   Let N (v) denote the set of the neighbors of v. Let C = v ∪ N (v) and µC the distribution of
the branching Markov process restricted to C. For a state ω ∈ S N (v) , we define Bv,ω to be the
conditional distribution of the state of v given ω. The Glauber step at v (the so called heat-bath
version) is the operation of randomizing the state of v from Bv,ω .
   Now we define the Glauber dynamics on a finite graph. It is a Markov chain on the state space of
the graph S V (G) obtained by choosing a vertex v uniformly at random, and performing the Glauber
step at v. See e.g. Section 3.3. in [36] on Glauber dynamics for various models.
   It is also clear from the theory of finite state space Markov chains that (with appropriate condi-
tions on Q) this Markov chain has a unique stationary distribution, which is the limiting distribution



                                                   12
of the Glauber dynamics. However, the order of the mixing time depends on Q; the question typ-
ically is whether the mixing time can be bounded by a linear function of the number of vertices.
Our main result will show that the so called Dobrushin condition, which implies fast mixing, also
implies that the process is factor of i.i.d. Note that the connection between fast mixing and factor
of i.i.d. property was also implicitly used in [25]. A paper of Berger, Kenyon, Mossel and Peres
[8] deals with the problem of fast mixing on trees for the Ising model, i.e. when there are only two
states. See Theorem 1.4. of [8]. Furthermore Mossel and Sly [46] gave a sharp threshold for general
bounded degree graphs. The recent paper of Lubetzky and Sly [38] contains more refined results for
the Ising model with underlying graph (Z/nZ)d , and its Theorem 4 refers to analogous results for
general graphs.
   It is important to mention the paper of Bubley and Dyer [13] on fast mixing of the Glauber
dynamics of Markov chains and on the path coupling technique, which is applied in [8], and whose
ideas will be used in what follows. See also the paper of Dembo and Montanari [16] and Chapter
15 in [36] for more details on mixing time of the Glauber dynamics.


3.2 The Dobrushin coefficient and factor of i.id. processes

When we examine how the properties of the Glauber dynamics depend on the transition matrix Q, it
is helpful to investigate the following: how does a change in the state of a single neighbor of v effect
the conditional distribution of the state of v at the Glauber step? This is the idea of the definition of
the Dobrushin coefficient (see e.g. [13, 18]).

Definition 3.1 (Dobrushin coefficient) Let us consider a reversible Markov chain on a finite state
space S with transition matrix Q. The Dobrushin coefficient of the Markov chain is defined by


  D = sup dT V (Bv,ω , Bv,ω′ ) : ω, ω ′ ∈ S N (v) , |{u ∈ N (v) : ω(u) 6= ω ′ (u)}| = 1 ,
         


where dT V is the total variation distance of probability distributions:

                      1X
  dT V (P1 , P2 ) =      |P1 (s) − P2 (s)|
                      2
                       s∈S

                             = inf{P(X 6= Y ) : X ∼ P1 , Y ∼ P2 , P is a coupling of X and Y }.

   To put it in another way, we consider pairs of configurations on the neighbours of v that differ at
only one place. We calculate the total variation distance of the conditional distributions at v given
the two configurations. Finally we take the supremum for all these pairs. Note that this definition
depends only on Q and the number of neighbors of v.

   Now we can formulate the main result of this section, which will be proved in Subsection 3.7.



                                                   13
Theorem 2 If the condition D < 1/d holds for a reversible Markov chain with transition matrix Q
on a finite state space S, then the branching Markov process νQ corresponding to Q on the d-regular
tree Td is a factor of i.i.d. process; that is, νQ ∈ Fd (S).

    This theorem is heuristically in accordance with the results of Bubley and Dyer [13], who proved
fast mixing of the Glauber dynamics if the condition D < 1/d holds. Moveover, this condition has
other consequences for correlation decay and the uniqueness of the Gibbs measure under various
circumstances [18, 37, 48, 50]. However, we do not know in general whether fast mixing or the
uniqueness of the Gibbs measure implies that the branching Markov process is factor of i.i.d.


3.3 Poisson Glauber dynamics on Td

When the vertex set of the underlying graph is finite, as we have already seen in Subsection 3.1,
it is easy to define the Glauber dynamics. From now on we get back to the infinite d-regular tree,
where it is not possible to choose a vertex uniformly at random, and perform Glauber dynamics step
by step this way. In this subsection we give a heuristic description of the continuous time Glauber
dynamics on the infinite tree for motivation. However, for our purposes the discrete version defined
in the next subsection is more convenient, hence we omit the precise details of the definition of the
continuous time model.
    We assign independent Poisson processes with rate 1 to the vertices of the tree. That is, each
vertex has a sequence of random times when it wakes up. At the beginning, at time zero, the vertices
are in random states chosen independently and uniformly from the finite state space S. When a
vertex wakes up, it performs a single Glauber step defined earlier. This depends only on the state
of the neighbors of the vertex. However, to know these states, we have to know what has happened
when the neighbors have performed Glauber steps earlier. This continues, hence it is not trivial
whether this process is well-defined. To see this, one can check that the expectation of the number
of Glauber steps that effect the randomization of a vertex waking up is finite.
    This argument could be made precise (see e.g. [33, Theorem 1] for the definition of joint dis-
tribution of the Poisson processes on T3 ). The advantage of the continuous time Glauber dynamics
is the fact that the probability that neighbors wake up at the same time is zero. When we define the
discrete time Glauber step in the next subsection, we will have to pay attention to avoid the event
that neighbors are waking up simultaneously.


3.4 The factor of i.i.d. Glauber step on Td

As we have seen in Subsection 3.1, the single Glauber step for finite graphs maps each configura-
tion in S V (G) to a random configuration. Now we are working with the infinite d-regular tree Td ,
hence we deal with random processes, which are probability distributions on S V (Td ) . We will de-


                                                   14
scribe a way of performing Glauber steps simultaneosly at different vertices such that our procedure
produces factor of i.i.d. processes from factor of i.i.d. processes.
    Given a configuration ω ∈ S V (Td ) , which is a labelling of the vertices of the d-regular tree with
labels from the finite state space S of the Markov chain, we will perform a single Glauber step to
get a random configuration Gω in S V (Td ) . Fix the transition matrix Q. The scheme is the following;
we give the details afterwards.

  1. Choose an invariant random subset U of V (Td ) such that it has positive density and it does
      not contain any two vertices of distance less than 3.

  2. For each vertex v ∈ U perform the usual Glauber step at v: randomize the state of vertex v
      according to the conditional distribution with respect to the states of its neighbours.

    More precisely, for the first part we need the following lemma.

Lemma 3.1 It is possible to find an invariant random subset U of V (Td ) such that

   • it is factor of i.i.d.: the distribution of the indicator function of U is in Fd ({0, 1});

   • it has positive density: the probability that the root o is in U is positive;

   • it does not contain any two vertices of distance less than 3.

Proof. We start with [0, 1]V (Td ) endowed with µ, the product measure of the uniform distributions
on the interval [0, 1]. That is, vertices have independent and uniformly distributed labels from [0, 1].
    A vertex v ∈ V (Td ) will be in U if its label is larger than the labels of the vertices in its
neighbourhood of radius 2. That is, for ω ∈ [0, 1]V (Td ) we set f (ω) = 1 if ω at the root o is larger
than ωu for all u ∈ V (Td ) at distance at most 2 from the root. Otherwise f (ω) = 0. Then we get
the characteristic function of U by placing the root to each vertex and applying f . This is a factor of
i.i.d. process satisfying all conditions.                                                             

    This lemma ensures that we can perform the first part of the Glauber step as a factor of i.i.d.
process. As for the second part, we just refer to the definition of the Glauber step at a single vertex:
each vertex v ∈ U randomizes its state given the state of its neighbors and according to the distribu-
tion of the branching Markov process constrained on the finite subset v ∪ N (v). Since the distance
of any two vertices in U is at least 3, these randomizations can be performed simoultaneously and
independently.
    It is straightforward to extend the definition of the Glauber step to a map from the set of proba-
bility measures on S V (Td ) to itself. Namely, choose a random configuration from S V (Td ) according
to the given measure, and perform the Glauber step described above. This gives a new probability
measure on S V (Td ) . It is also easy to see that if we apply this for an invariant probability measure,
then the resulting measure will also be invariant. Hence we have extended the definition of the
Glauber step to a transformation of the form G : Id (S) → Id (S).

                                                   15
   Moreover, note that if ν is factor of i.i.d., then G(ν) is also factor of i.i.d., since the set of vertices
performing Glauber steps is chosen by a factor of i.i.d. process by Lemma 3.1, and Glauber steps
depend only on the state of the neighbors of these vertices.


3.5 The invariance of the branching Markov process for the Glauber step

In order to prove Theorem 2, we will need the fact that the Glauber step defined above does not
change the distribution of the branching Markov process.

Proposition 3.1 (Invariance) If νQ ∈ Id (S) is the branching Markov process with transition ma-
trix Q then it is a fixed point of the Glauber step corresponding to Q and d (i.e. G(νQ ) = νQ .)

Proof. First we check that the Glauber step at a single vertex u does not change the distribution of
the branching Markov process. It follows from the fact that the distribution of the state of u and the
joint distribution of the states at V (Td ) \ {u ∪ N (u)} are conditionally independent given the states
of the vertices in N (u).
   Let U be the set of vertices performing Glauber steps when we apply G. Since these vertices are
far away from each other (their distance is at least 3 according to Lemma 3.1), the randomizations are
independent, and therefore, since the Glauber step at a single vertex does not change the distribution,
it is also invariant for finitely many steps. On the other hand, for arbitrary U it is possible to find
finite sets of vertices Un such that (i) Un ⊆ Un+1 for all n; (ii) ∞
                                                                  S
                                                                    n=1 Un = V (Td ); (iii) if a vertex

is in U ∩ Un , then all its neighbors are in Un . For example, one can use balls of appropriate radius
with a few vertices omitted from the boundary. Since every Un contains finitely many vertices,
and vertices on the boundary of Un do not perform Glauber steps, the distribution of the branching
Markov process is invariant for the Glauber steps at vertices U ∩ Un . This also implies that the
branching Markov process is invariant for G, when we perform Glauber steps at the vertices of U
simultaneously.                                                                                            


3.6 The Glauber step as a contraction

We will prove that if the Dobrushin coefficient (Definition 3.1) is small enough, then the factor of
i.i.d. Glauber step is a contraction with respect to the metric mc derived from the Hamming distance
on S. First we need a notation and a lemma.

Definition 3.2 (Coupling Hamming distance) Let S be a finite state space with the discrete topol-
ogy and with the Hamming distance: m(s, s) = 0 for all s ∈ S and m(s, t) = 1 if s 6= t. We
denote by hc the metric defined by equation (4) on Id (S) corresponding to the Hamming distance
(see Section 2.2).




                                                    16
    Recall that Bv,ω is the distribution of the state of vertex v at the Glauber step if the state of its
neighbors are given by ω ∈ S N (v) .

Lemma 3.2 Suppose that we have a branching Markov process on Td with Dobrushin coefficient
D. Fix v ∈ V (Td ) and ω, ω ′ ∈ S N (v) such that |{u ∈ N (v) : ω(u) 6= ω ′ (u)}| = k. Then we have
that
                                       dT V (Bv,ω , Bv,ω′ ) ≤ kD.

Proof. The case k = 1 is trivial. The general case follows by induction using the triangle inequality.


    Now we can prove that the factor of i.i.d. Glauber step is a contraction if the Dobrushin condition
holds.

Proposition 3.2 If D < 1/d, then G : Id (S) → Id (S) is a contraction with respect to the coupling
Hamming distance hc ; that is, there exists r < 1 such that

                   hc (G(ν1 ), G(ν2 )) < r · hc (ν1 , ν2 )    for all ν1 , ν2 ∈ Id (S).


Proof.   Choose ε > 0 such that r := (1 + ε)(1 − p + pdD) < 1, where p > 0 is the density
of U in the Glauber step. This is possible if D < 1/d. Fix ν1 , ν2 ∈ Id (S). Denote their distance
hc (ν1 , ν2 ) by h. By the definition of the metric hc , there is a joining Ψ of ν1 and ν2 such that
E(m(Ψ|v )) < (1 + ε)h holds ayt any given vertex v, where m denotes the Hamming distance on S.
    Our goal is to construct a joining Ψ′ of G(ν1 ) and G(ν2 ) such that E(m(Ψ′ |v )) ≤ rh. We
construct this joining in a way that the set of vertices that perform the Glauber step are the same for
ν1 and ν2 . As a first step we choose an invariant random set U according to Lemma 3.1 such that U
is independent from Ψ.
    We define Ψ′ from Ψ and U as follows. When we randomize the state of a given vertex v ∈ U ,
conditionally on the states of vertices in N (v), we use the best possible coupling of the conditional
distributions in total variation (the probability that the two random variables are different is mini-
mal). Since we deal with finite number of configurations and a discrete probability space for fixed
u, this is sensible. For the distinct vertices in U we join these couplings independently to get Ψ′ for
a fixed U . This defines Ψ′ on the whole extended probability space.
    Since U is invariant and the randomizations depend only on the states of the neighbors, Ψ′ is
also invariant. It is clear that the marginal distributions ν1′ and ν2′ of Ψ′ are identical to G(ν1 ) and
G(ν2 ), respectively.
    Now we give an upper bound on the coupling Hamming distance of ν1′ and ν2′ .
    Fix v ∈ V (Td ). The probability that v ∈ U is p by definition. With probability 1 − p its state
is not changed, therefore there is a difference in Ψ′ with probability E(m(Ψ|v )) < h(1 + ε); this


                                                    17
is just the density of differences in the original process. Otherwise a Glauber step is performed at
v. The expected value of the number of differences in N (v) between the random configurations
according to ν1 and ν2 is dE(m(Ψ|u )) < dh(1 + ε). By Lemma 3.2, if the number of differences is
k, then it is possible to couple the conditional distributions such that the probability that the state of
v is a difference is less than or equal to kD. When we defined Ψ′ , we have chosen the best couplings
with respect to total variation. Therefore the probability that we see a difference in Ψ′ is less than
(1 − p)h(1 + ε) + pdhD(1 + ε). By the choice of ε (where we used the condition D < 1/d) this is
less than h, and we get that

                    hc (G(ν1 ), G(ν2 )) < (1 − p)h(1 + ε) + pdhD(1 + ε) = rh.

                                                                                                       

    Now, putting Proposition 3.1 and Proposition 3.2 together one can easily show that the branching
Markov process is a limit of factor of i.i.d. (it belongs to Ld (S)) with respect to the ¯
                                                                                         d-metric if the
Dobrushin coefficient is smaller than 1/d.
    Namely, we start with an i.i.d. labelling of the vertices of the tree by labels from S; this is
measure ν0 . We have checked that if a given invariant process is factor of i.i.d., then its image under
the Glauber step G is also factor of i.i.d. Therefore if we apply G finitely many times, we also get
a factor of i.i.d. process. By Proposition 3.1 the branching Markov process is a fixed point of G. A
contraction can not have more than one fixed points, and hence it is also clear that Gn ν0 (which is
                                                                             ¯
a factor of i.i.d. process) converges to the branching Markov process in the d-metric exponentially
fast.
    However, in the next section we will prove the stronger statement that the branching Markov
process is itself a factor of i.i.d. process if D < 1/d holds.


3.7 Proof of Theorem 2

Recall that the Glauber step G can be defined as a map from the set of invariant processes to itself. It
                                     ¯
is a contraction with respect to the d-metric, whose unique fixed point is the corresponding branching
Markov process. Moreover, it maps factor of i.i.d. processes to factor of i.i.d. processes.

Proof.    First we define an operation T on sequences of processes that are already coupled to
each other somehow. More precisely, let (J1 , J2 , . . .) be a (possibly infinite) sequence of invariant
processes from Id (S) defined on the same probability space. Then T (J1 , J2 , . . .) will also be a
sequence of invariant processes. The distribution of the kth term of T (J1 , J2 , . . .) will be identical
to the distribution of G(Jk ). The main point is the coupling of these processes. First we couple
G(J1 ) and G(J2 ) such that, at each vertex where a Glauber step is performed, the coupling realizes
the total variation distance of the conditional distributions given the states of the neighbors. Then


                                                   18
we couple G(J3 ) to the already existing probability space such that it is optimally coupled to G(J2 )
with respect to the total variation distance. We continue this, from the left to the right, we always
couple the next term to the previous one with the coupling that realizes the total variation distance
at each vertex.
    Let I be the i.i.d. process on Td whose marginal distributions at the vertices are uniform on S.
We define
                                 I (n) = T(I, T(I, T(I, . . . , T(I, T(I))))),

with n copies of I as follows. We already know that T maps any sequence of invariant processes
to another sequence of processes of the same length. When we have a sequence, and we write an
I before it, we mean the sequence consisting of a copy of I and the original sequence coupled to a
common probability space independently. We get a longer sequence, and we apply T to this. Then
again, we add an independent copy of I, and apply T . We repeat this n times to get I (n) . It is also
clear that the kth term of this sequence of length n is identical in distribution to Gk I. Therefore it
belongs to Fd (S).
    When we are producing this sequence, we are using the following probability spaces that are
coupled to each other. First, we need the spaces where these copies of I are defined. Then, when
we apply the Glauber step, we need to choose the random set of vertices waking up, like in Lemma
3.1. Finally, there are the moves when the given vertices randomize their current state with the
appropriate coupling.
    The next step is to show that I (∞) also makes sense. It will have infinitely many coordinates.
Since we performed the coupling procedure from the left to the right, if we want to determine the
kth term of I (∞) , then it is sufficient to deal with the first k copies of I and choose the optimal
couplings defined above finitely many times. Hence the whole sequence is well defined.
    We go further and we will see that I (∞) = (H1 , H2 , . . .) is a factor of i.i.d. process. In the
construction of I ∞ we use the following independent random variables, uniformly distributed on
[0, 1]:

   1. for each application of T , we need the random set from Lemma 3.1; this requires an indepen-
          dent copy of [0, 1] associated with each vertex of Td ;

   2. for each application of T , we need countably many copies of [0, 1] associated with each vertex
          to perform the Glauber steps and their couplings.

It is easy to see that each coordinate of I ∞ depends measurably on finitely many of these random
variables. It follows that I ∞ is factor of i.i.d.
    We claim that for each vertex v ∈ V (Td ) the sequence (Hk (v)) is constant except for finitely
many terms almost surely, and the process ν defined by v 7→ limk→∞ Hk (v) is a factor of i.i.d.
process. Let pk be the probability that the root has a different state in Hk and Hk+1 . Since the


                                                      19
Glauber step is a contraction with respect to the Hamming distance, pk tends to 0 exponentially
fast. A Borel–Cantelli argument implies that the state of a given vertex stabilizes after finitely many
steps. Then it follows that the limit is measurable and so it is factor of i.i.d.
    Finally, since Hk converges to the fixed point of G, which is the branching Markov process by
Proposition 3.1, we get that the branching Markov process is factor of i.i.d.                             



4 Entropy inequalities
In this section we will formulate necessary conditions for invariant processes to be typical based on
entropy. These inequalities imply necessary conditions for a process to be factor of i.i.d. Note that
these kind of inequalities were used for various purposes. They are closely related to the results of
Bowen [12] on f -invariant for factors of shifts on free groups (e.g. for the factor of i.i.d. case when
d is even). Rahman and Virág also use this tool for examining independent sets in factor of i.i.d.
processes on the d-regular tree; see Section 2 of [47].
    Now we define configuration entropy as we will use it later on. Recall that if µ is a probability
distribution on a finite set S of atoms with probabilities p1 , p2 , . . . , pK , then its entropy is defined
              PK
by h(µ) = − i=1 pi ln pi . (If a probability pi is zero, then the corresponding term is also defined
to be equal to zero.) We also define H(µ) := eh(µ) . Assume that a finite set of size n has an
S-coloring with color distribution µ. Let H(µ, n) denote the number of such colorings. Then
H(µ, n) = H(µ)n(1+o(1)) as n tends to infinity.

Definition 4.1 (Configuration entropy) Let ν ∈ Id (S) be an invariant measure on S-valued pro-
cesses on Td , where S is a finite set. Fix a finite set F ⊂ Td . The measure ν induces a probability
distribution on the S-colorings of F (that is, on the finite set S V (F ) ). Let the configuration entropy
h(F ) be the entropy of this probability distribution.

    The invariance of ν implies that h(F ) = h(F ′ ) whenever there is an automorphism of Td taking
F to F ′ . This means that it makes sense to talk about the entropy of a given configuration in Td (for
example an edge or a star) without specifying where the given configuration is in Td .
    We prove two entropy inequalities, which hold for every typical process, and hence for every
universal and factor of i.i.d. process by Lemma 2.1.
    Recall from Section 2 that Rd is the set of invariant processes that can be modelled on random
d-regular graphs. We denote by h( q) the edge entropy, that is, h(F ) when the finite graph is an edge,
                                    q

and h( q) will be the vertex entropy, where F is a single vertex.

Theorem 3 For any typical process ν ∈ Rd the following holds:

                                          d q
                                            h( q) ≥ (d − 1)h( q).
                                          2


                                                    20
    Before proving Theorem 3 we need a lemma. Let P M (k) denote the number of perfect match-
ings on a set with k elements.

Lemma 4.1 Let V and S be finite sets where |V | = n. Let µ be a probability distribution on S and
let ν be a probability distribution on S × S. Assume that f : V → S is a coloring of V such that
the color of a random element in V has distribution µ. Let Mf be the set of perfect matchings on
V such that the pair of colors on the two endpoints of a random directed edge in the matching has
distribution ν. Assume that Mf is not empty. Then |Mf | = P M (n)H(ν, n/2)H(µ, n)−1 .

Proof. Let M ′ = ∪g Mg where g runs through the S-colorings of V with color distribution µ. We
compute |M ′ | in two different ways. It is clear that |M ′ | = H(µ, n)|Mf |. On the other hand we
can generate an element in M ′ by first choosing a perfect matching on V and then putting colors
on the endpoints of the edges in a way that the distribution of colored edges is ν. This can be done
in P M (n)H(ν, n/2) different ways. So we obtain that H(µ, n)|Mf | = P M (n)H(ν, n/2). The
proof is complete.
    Now we are ready to prove Theorem 3.

Proof. The basic idea is the following. Assume that S is a finite set and ν ∈ Rd is a typical process,
                                                                                 ∞
which belongs to Id (S). We denote by {ni }∞
                                           i=1 the sequence such that ν ∈ [{Gni }i=1 ] holds with

probability 1. Let νv denote the marginal of ν on a vertex in Td and let νe denote the marginal of ν
on an edge in Td . Let ε > 0. We denote by Gn,ε the set of S-colored d-regular graphs on the vertex
set Vn with the restriction that the distribution of vertex colors is ε-close to νv and the distribution
of colored (directed) edges is ε-close to νe in total variation distance. Since ν is typical we know
that if n is large enough and belongs to the sequence {ni }∞
                                                           i=1 , then almost every d-regular graph on

n vertices is in Gn,ε . It follows that

                                                     |Gn,ε |
                                           lim sup           ≥1                                       (5)
                                            n→∞        tn

holds for every ε > 0 where tn is the number of d-regular graphs on n vertices.
    In the rest of the proof we basically compute the asymptotic behavior of log |Gn,ε | if ε is small
and n is large enough depending on ε. We start by assigning d half-edges to each element of Vn .
Let Vn∗ denote the set of these half edges. We first color the vertices according to the distribution νv .
We color Vn∗ such that each half edge inherits the color of its incident vertex. Then we match these
half-edges such that the distribution of the colors of the endpoints of a uniform random edge is νe .
To be more precise, in each coloring throughout this proof, we allow an ε error in the total variation
distance of distributions.
    There are H( q)n(1+o(1)) ways to color Vn with distribution νv . Here o(1) means a quantity that
goes to 0 if first n goes to infinity and then ε goes to 0.



                                                     21
    Assume that the vertices of Vn have a fix coloring. Let M denote the set of perfect macthings
on Vn∗ that satisfy the above requirement. By Lemma 4.1 we have that

                          |M | = P M (nd)H( q)nd/2(1+o(1)) /H( q)nd(1+o(1)) .
                                            q


    Finally we have to take into consideration that the order of the half-edges does not matter, hence
we get every coloring (d!)n times.
    Putting everything together, the number of colored d-regular graphs on Vn with the required
property is the following:

                                H( q)n(1+o(1)) P M (nd)H( q)nd/2(1+o(1))
                                                           q
                                                                         .
                                         H( q)nd(1+o(1)) (d!)n
    Using the same argument about the half-edges but forgetting about all colorings, one can see
that the number of d-regular graphs on n vertices is

                                                P M (nd)
                                                         .
                                                  (d!)n

    By (5) we conclude that

                                      H( q)n(1+o(1)) H( q)nd/2(1+o(1))
                                                        q
                              lim sup                                  ≥ 1;
                                n→∞           H( q)nd(1+o(1))

                                  H( q)d/2(1+o(1)) ≥ H( q)(d−1)(1+o(1)) .
                                     q

    By tending to 0 with ε, taking the logarithm of both sides and rearranging we get the statement
of the theorem.                                                                                         
    Similarly to the proof of Theorem 3, one can show the following.

Theorem 4 For any typical process ν ∈ Rd the following holds:
                                                 q       d q
                                            h(q qq qd ) ≥ h( q),
                                                         2
         q
where q qq qd is the star of degree d.

Proof.    The proof is very similar to the proof of Theorem 3 so we only give the details that are
different. Let ν ∈ Rd ∩ Id (S). Let C denote the star of degree d. We label the root of C by 0 and
                                                       q
the endpoints of the rays by {1, 2, . . . , d}. Let q qq qd and q denote the marginal distributions of ν on
                                                                q

the degree d star and on an edge in Td . Again we count S-colored d-regular graphs on n vertices
                                                                                     q
with the restriction that the distribution on random stars and edges are close to q qq qd and q. Let Vn be
                                                                                              q

a set of n elements. To each element vi ∈ Vn we assign d half-edges {vi,j }dj=1 . We denote by Vn∗
the set of half-edges. Let f : Vn∗ → S × S be a coloring of the half-edges with pairs of elements
from S such that the first coordinates of f (vi,j ) and f (vi,k ) are the same, say g(i) ∈ S, for every
triple 1 ≤ i ≤ n and 1 ≤ j, k ≤ d. To each number 1 ≤ i ≤ n we can assign an S-colored version

                                                    22
of the star C such that the color of the root 0 is si and the color of j ∈ V (C) is the second coordinate
                                                                                                      q
of f (vi,j ) for 1 ≤ j ≤ d. We say that f is ”good” if the distribution of these colored stars is q qq qd
                                                                     q
if 1 ≤ i ≤ n is random. The number of good colorings is H(q qq dq )n(1+o(1)) . We obtain a d-regular
graph G with a desired coloring g by using a perfect matching on the set of half-edges such that
the second coordinate of each half-edge is equal to the first coordinate of its pair in the mathching.
Using Lemma 4.1, we obtain that the number of such perfect matchings is

                            P M (nd)H( q)(dn/2)(1+o(1)) H( q)−dn(1+o(n)) .
                                       q                   q


Thus the number of d-regular graphs with a desired coloring is
                                                    q
                                      P M (nd)H(q qq dq )n(1+o(1))
                                                                   .
                                        H( q)(dn/2)(1+o(1)) d!n
                                           q

                                                        q
Similarly to the proof of Theorem 3 we obtain that H(q qq qd ) ≥ H( q)d/2 . This completes the proof.
                                                                    q



4.1 Entropy inequalities and branching Markov chains

In Theorem 2 we gave a sufficient condition for a branching Markov process to be factor of i.i.d.
process. This can not be necessary, as the example of the Ising model shows. The Ising model with
parameter ϑ isthe particular case
                                where the Markov chain has only two states and the transition
                    1+ϑ    1−ϑ
                     2      2
matrix Q =                       is symmetric. That is, when we propagate the states from the
                  1−ϑ    1+ϑ
                   2       2
root along the tree, 1+ϑ
                      2   is the probability that we keep the current state.       The model is called
ferromagnetic if ϑ ≥ 0; i.e. if it is more likely to keep the current state than to change it. The
Dobrushin coefficient of the Ising model with parameter ϑ ≥ 0 is just ϑ. Therefore our theorem
implies that when −1/d < |ϑ| < 1/d, then the ferromagnetic Ising model is a factor of i.i.d. process.
But a stronger statement is known: the Ising model is a factor of i.i.d. if −1/(d−1) ≤ ϑ ≤ 1/(d−1).
To prove this, one can use that the clusters in the random cluster representation of the Ising model
are almost surely finite in this regime. See e.g. Section 3 of [40] for the details. See also the paper of
Häggström, Jonasson and Lyons [29] for a generalization of this result to random-cluster and Potts
models.
                                                                 √
    It is also known that the Ising model with parameter |ϑ| > 1/ d − 1 can not be factor of i.i.d.
(not even a weak limit of factor of i.i.d processes) see [40] and [5]. It is an open question whether
                                             √
the Ising model with 1/(d − 1) < |ϑ| ≤ 1/ d − 1 is factor of i.i.d. or not (or whether it is limit of
factor of i.i.d).
    For the ferromagnetic Ising model, the parameter ϑ is equal to the spectral radius of the transition
matrix Q, which is, in general, the second largest eigenvalue in absolute value after the eigenvalue
1. More generally, the results of [5] imply that a branching Markov process is not the weak limit of
                                                                                                √
factor of i.i.d. processes if the spectral radius ̺ of its transition matrix Q is larger than 1/ d − 1.

                                                   23
We will use Theorem 3 to show that for general branching Markov processes the correlation bound
is far from being optimal.

Theorem 5 For every d ≥ 3 and ε > 0 there exists a transition matrix Q such that

   • its spectral radius is less than ε;

   • the branching Markov process on the d-regular tree Td according to Q is not a typical process,
      and hence it is not the weak limit of factor of i.i.d. processes.

                                                                                  √
                                                                                 2 p
Proof. Choose a prime p which is equal to 1 modulo 4 and which satisfies p+1 < ε. Let G be a
(p + 1)-regular Ramanujan graph (see the definition below) on k vertices such that

                                                           d
                                             k > (p + 1) d−2 .

Due to Lubotzky, Phillips and Sarnak [39], this is possible. Let Q be the transition matrix of the
simple random walk on the vertices of G. (That is, Q is the adjacency matrix of G normalized by
p + 1.) Let r be the spectral radius of G. By the definition of Ramanujan graphs we have that
      √
     2 p
r ≤ p+1 < ε.
    The branching Markov process on Td according to Q is an invariant process in Id (N ), where N
represents the vertices of G, that is, it has k elements. Since G is regular, the stationary random walk
is uniformly distributed on its vertices, and therefore the vertex entropy of this branching Markov
process is just ln k.
    As for the edge entropy: we can choose the first vertex uniformly at random, and then one
of its p + 1 neighbors arbitrarily, but the order does not matter. Therefore the edge entropy is
ln k + ln(p + 1).
    From Proposition 3 we get that if the branching Markov process according to the transition
matrix Q was a typical process, then the following would be true:

                                           d q
                                             h( q) ≥ (d − 1)h( q);
                                           2
                                 d
                                   [ln k + ln(p + 1)] ≥ (d − 1) ln k;
                                 2
                                      d ln(p + 1) ≥ (d − 2) ln k;

                                           (p + 1)d/(d−2) ≥ k.

    This contradicts the choice of k. Therefore the branching Markov process according to Q is not
a typical process.

Remark 4.1 The example of the Potts model shows that the typicallity of a process or the fact
whether it is factor of i.i.d. can not be decided based only on the number of states and the spectral
radius. Let Q1 be the transition matrix of the Potts model on k states (see e.g. [49]): with a given

                                                    24
probability p it stays at the actual state, otherwise it chooses another state uniformly at random. Its
                                 pk
spectral radius is equal to 1 − k−1 . Moreover, it is also known that the Potts model satisfies the
Dobrushin condition if k > 2d [48]. By choosing p such that the spectral radius is so small that the
previous theorem can be applied, we get that the branching Markov chain in the previous theorem
is not limit of factor of i.i.d., while Theorem 2 implies that the branching Markov process according
to Q1 is a factor of i.i.d. process.

Remark 4.2 We have seen that the entropy inequality can lead to stronger bound than the correla-
tion decay when the number of states is sufficiently large. However, for the Ising model, when k = 2,
the correlation decay bound is stronger than the bound we get from this entropy inequality.



4.2 Entropy inequalities and random d-regular graphs

In this section we show how to use entropy inequalities to obtain results about random d-regular
graphs. Our strategy is that we use Theorem 4 to show that certain invariant processes can not
be typical. Then, by the correspondence principle, we translate this to statements about random
d-regular graphs. Throughout this section we assume that d ≥ 3.
    We denote by C the degree d star in Td with root o and leaves w1 , w2 , . . . , wd . Let µ ∈ Id (M ) be
an invariant process. If F is a finite subset of V (Td ), then we denote by µF the marginal distribution
of µ restricted to F , and by νF the product measure of the marginals of µF . We denote by t(F ) the
total correlation of the joint distribution of µF ; that is, t(F ) = h(νF ) − h(F ).

Proposition 4.1 Let µ be a typical process and suppose that h(C) − h(C \ {w1 }) ≤ b for some
b ≥ 0. Then t(C \ {w1 }) ≤ b 2d−2
                             d−2 and
                                                           p
                           dT V (µC\{w1 } , νC\{w1 } ) ≤    b(d − 1)/(d − 2).

Proof. By Theorem 4 and the condition of the proposition we get
                             d                            d
                   0 ≤ h(C) − h({o, w1 }) ≤ h(C \ {w1 }) − h({o, w1 }) + b.                            (6)
                             2                            2
By using a simple upper bound on the entropy of C \ {w1 } we get
                                                            d
                    0 ≤ h(o) + (d − 1)[h({o, w1 }) − h(o)] − h({o, w1 }) + b.
                                                            2
By rearranging and multiplying by d/(d − 2), this implies
                                    d               db
                                   − h({o, w1 }) ≤     − dh(o).
                                    2              d−2
Putting this together with inequality (6), we conclude
                                                                2d − 2
                                0 ≤ h(C \ {w1 }) − dh(o) +             b.
                                                                d−2

                                                   25
Since h(νF ) = dh(o) for an invariant process if F consists of d vertices, this concludes the proof of
the first inequality.
                                                     
    Observe that t(C \ {w1 }) = D µC\{w1 } ||νC\{w1 } , where D denotes the relative entropy. Re-
call that Pinsker’s inequality says that D(P ||Q) ≥ 2dT V (P, Q)2 , where P and Q are two probability
distributions on the same set. This implies the statement.                                               

    As a first application of Proposition 4.1, we use it in the case of b = 0.

Definition 4.2 Let S be a finite set and µ ∈ Id (S) be an invariant process. Assume that C is a
degree d star in Td with root o and leaves w1 , w2 , . . . , wd . We say that µ is rigid if

   1. the values on C \ {w1 } uniquely determine the value on w1 ;

   2. µ restricted to C \ {w1 } is not i.i.d. at the vertices.

Proposition 4.2 If µ ∈ Id (S) is a rigid process, then it is not typical.

Proof. The first assumption in Definition 4.2 implies that Proposition 4.1 holds for µ with b = 0,
and thus we obtain that µC\{w1 } = νC\{w1 } , which contradicts the second assumption.                   

    We give an example for families of rigid processes.

Lemma 4.2 Assume that S is a finite set in R and that µ satisfies the eigenvector equation; namely,
that a µ-random function f : Td → S satisfies that λf (o) = f (w1 ) + f (w2 ) + · · · + f (wd ) holds
with probability 1. Then µ is rigid.

Proof. Observe that f (w1 ) = λf (o) − (f (w2 ) + f (w3 ) + · · · + f (wd )), which shows that the first
condition is satisfied. We want to exclude the possibility that f (o), f (w2 ), f (w3 ), . . . , f (wn ) are
identically distributed independent random variables. We can assume that all values in S are taken
with positive probability. This means that for every pair (c1 , c2 ) ∈ S × S we have with positive
probability that f (w2 ) = f (w3 ) = · · · = f (wd ) = c1 , f (o) = c2 , and thus f (w1 ) = λc2 −(d−1)c1.
It follows that λS + (1 − d)S ⊆ S (using Minkowski sum), which is impossible if S is finite.             

    We give further applications of Proposition 4.1 in extremal combinatorics.

Definition 4.3 Let G = (V, E) be a d-regular (not necessarily finite) graph. Let M : S × S →
                       P
N ∪ {0}. We assume that q∈S M (s, q) = d holds for every s ∈ S. Furthermore, we suppose that
the weighted directed graph with adjacency matrix M is connected. Let f : V → S be an arbitrary
function. We say that f is a covering at v ∈ V if

                              {w | f (w) = q, w ∈ N (v)} = M (f (v), q),

where N (v) is the set of neighbors of v.



                                                     26
Lemma 4.3 Assume that M : S × S → N ∪ {0} is as in the previous definition. Fix ε ≥ 0 and
d ≥ 3. Assume furthermore that µ ∈ Id (S) is an invariant process such that a µ-random function
f : V (Td∗ ) → S is a covering at the root o with probability 1 − ε, and the distribution of f (o) is
supported on at least two elements. Then the following hold.

 (a) h(C) − h(C \ {w1 }) ≤ ε log |S|.

 (b) There exists δ = δ(M, ε) > 0 such that P(f (o) = s) ≥ δ holds for all s ∈ S.

  (c) By using the notation of Proposition 4.1, we have
                                                                  1 d
                                  dT V (µC\{w1 } , νC\{w1 } ) ≥     (δ − ε).
                                                                  2

 (d) If ε = 0, then µ is rigid.

Proof.    We denote by A the event that f is a covering at o, and by B its complement. Then
P(B) = ε.
(a) For ε = 0: observe that f (w1 ) is the unique element q ∈ S with the following property:

                   | {w | f (w) = q, w ∈ {w2 , w3 , . . . , wd }} = M (f (o), q) − 1,

which depends only on the values of f on C \ {w1 }. Therefore the values on C \ {w1 } uniquely
determine the value on w1 , and the two entropies are equal. Otherwise, conditional entropy with
respect to an event with positive probability will be defined as the entropy of the conditional distri-
bution. Then we have

             h(C) = h(C|A)P(A) + h(C|B)P(B) − P(A) log P(A) − P(B) log P(B);

h(C \ {w1 }) = h(C \ {w1 }|A)P(A) + h(C \ {w1 }|B)P(B) − P(A) log P(A) − P(B) log P(B).

If A holds, then by the argument above, the value on w1 is uniquely determined by the other ones.
Hence h(C \ {w1 }|A) = h(C|A). On the other hand, h(C|B) ≤ h(C \ {w1 }|B) + log |S| is a
trivial upper bound. Therefore we obtain

               h(C) − h(C \ {w1 }) = [h(C|B) − h(C \ {w1 }|B)]P(B) ≤ ε log |S|.

                                  ε
(b) We show that δ(M, ε) ≥ dak − d−1 holds, where k is the diameter of the directed graph with
adjacency matrix M . If s ∈ S has probability a, then any of its neighbors t has probability at least
(a − ε)/d, due to the following. The probability of the event D that f (o) = s and f is a covering at
the root is at least a − ε. Given D, the joint distribution of the neighbors is permutation invariant.
On the event D, the values of f evaluated at the neighbors of the root are exactly the neighbors of s
with multiplicity in M . Hence the probability that the value of f at a fixed neighbor of the root is t
is at least 1/d conditionally on D. Using the invariance of the process, this proves the lower bound
for the probability of t.

                                                  27
    We can choose an element s0 ∈ S which has probability at least 1/|S|. By induction, we have
that an element of distance m from s0 in the directed graph M has probability at least
                                                               
                                  1          1    1           1
                                       −ε      +     + ...+ m .
                                |S|dm        d d2            d
Since every other element in S can be reached by a directed path of length at most k in M , the proof
is complete.
(c) Choose s1 , s2 ∈ S such that M (s1 , s2 ) ≤ d/2. The covering property at o implies that the
probability of the event {f (o) = s1 , f (w2 ) = s2 , f (w3 ) = s2 , . . . , f (wd ) = s2 } is zero. That is,
this event has conditional probability 0 with respect to A. It follows that

               P(f (o) = s1 , f (w2 ) = s2 , f (w3 ) = s2 , . . . , f (wd ) = s2 ) ≤ P(B) = ε.

On the other hand, by part (b) and invariance, the same event has probability at least δ d when we
consider ν restricted to C \{w1 } (recall that ν is the product measure of the marginals). This implies
the statement.
(d) The first property follows from the argument in (a). In addition, we have seen in part (c) that
the probability of a given configuration is 0. On the other hand, by (b), the probability of each value
is positive. This excludes the possibility that µ restricted to C \ {w1 } is i.i.d.                       

    For the combinatorial applications, we need the following definition.

Definition 4.4 Let G = (V, G) be a finite d-regular graph, and M : S × S → N ∪ {0} as in
definition 4.3. For an arbitrary function g : V → S let W ⊂ V be the subset of vertices v at
which h is not a covering. We introduce the quantity e(g) := |W |/|V |. Furthermore, we define the
covering error ratio of G with respect to M by

                                         c(G, M ) = min e(g).
                                                      g:V →S

    It will be important that the covering error ratio can be extended to graphings in a natural way
such that the extension is continuous in the local-global topology. Let G be a graphing on the vertex
set Ω. Let g : Ω → S be an arbitrary measurable function. Let W ⊆ Ω be the set of vertices at
which g is not a covering of M . We denote by e(g) the measure of W . We define c(G, M ) as the
infimum of e(g) where g runs through all measurable maps g : Ω → S. We can also obtain c(G, M )
as a minimum taken on processes. For µ ∈ Id (S) let e(µ) denote the probability that a µ random
function f : Td∗ → S is not a covering of M at o. Using the fact that e(µ) is continuous in the weak
topology and that γ(G, S) is compact in the weak topology we obtain that

                                        c(G, M ) =     min      e(µ).                                    (7)
                                                     µ∈γ(G,S)

    Now we are ready to prove the next combinatorial statement. Recall that δ(M, 0) > 0, and
hence ε0 defined in the theorem is also positive.

                                                     28
Theorem 6 Fix d ≥ 3 and M as in the definition 4.3. Let
                                                       r       
                                   1          d             d−1
                 ε0 = inf ε > 0 : (δ(M, ε) − ε) ≤ ε log |S|       ,
                                   2                        d−2
where δ(M, ε) is defined in Lemma 4.3 (b). Then for every 0 < ε < ε0 the probability P(c(Gi , M ) <
ε) converges to 0 as i → ∞, where Gi is a random d-regular graph on i vertices.

Proof.   Suppose that the invariant process µ ∈ Id (S) satisfies the conditions of Lemma 4.3 for
some ε > 0, and it is typical. Part (a) implies that Proposition 4.1 can be applied with b = ε log |S|.
Putting this together with part (c) of the lemma, we obtain
                                                                        r
                  1                                                                 d−1
                    [δ(M, ε)d − ε] ≤ dT V (µC\{w1 } , νC\{w1 } ) ≤      ε log |S|       .
                  2                                                                 d−2
   By equation (7) it follows that c(G, M ) ≥ ε0 holds for every typical graphing in Xd . Let
0 < ε < ε0 be an arbitrary real number and and let Qε = {G|c(G, M ) ≤ ε}. By applying
Proposition 2.2 for Qε , the proof is complete.                                                     

   Theorem 6 provides a family of combinatorial statements depending on the matrix M . An
interesting application of Theorem 6 is when M is the adjacency matrix of a d-regular simple graph
H. In this case we obtain that random d-regular graphs do not cover (not even in an approximative
way) the graph H. If we apply Proposition 4.2 to such a matrix M we get the following. Let
µ ∈ Id (V (H)) be the invariant process on Td that is a covering map from Td to H. Then µ is not
typical and thus it is not in the weak closure of factor of i.i.d processes.
   We show two concrete examples, using only 2 × 2 matrices, to illustrate how our general state-
ment of Theorem 6 is related to known results. Note that in these special cases the literature has
better bounds then ours; our goal is only demonstrating the connection between different areas.
                                                                           
                                   0         d                      0       d
                             M1 =             , M2 =                       
                                   1       d−1          d                   0
   The dominating ratio of a finite graph G is the following. Let m be the size of the smallest
set of vertices V ′ of G such that each vertex of G is either in V ′ or connected to a vertex in V ′ .
The dominating ratio is defined as dr(G) = m/|V (G)|. It is clear that the dominating ratio of
a d-regular graph is at least 1/(d + 1). It is easy to see that the dominating ratio of a d-regular
graph G is equal to 1/(d + 1) if and only if c(G, M1 ) = 0. For this particular matrix, one can use
a better bound than the general one given in Lemma 4.3. Namely, as a simple calculation shows,
δ(M, ε) = 1/(d + 1) − ε/(d + 1) can be chosen. Theorem 6 applied to M1 gives to following
combinatorial statement.

Proposition 4.3 For every d ≥ 3 we define
                                          d     r              
                                   1     1−ε                    d−1
                 ε0 = inf ε > 0 :               − ε ≤ ε log |S|      .
                                   2 d+1                        d−2

                                                   29
Then P (dr(Gi ) < 1/(d + 1) + ε) converges to 0 as i → ∞ for all 0 < ε < ε0 .

   This gives the following for small values of d.

                    d          3              4              5               6
                    ε0   4.38 · 10−5     6.15 · 10−7    4.47 · 10−9    2.08 · 10−11

   For d = 3 Molloy and Reed [45] gave a much better bound 0.2636 for the dominating ratio; our
result gives 0.2500438. It would be interesting to improve our bounds for larger d as well.

   The next application shows that random d-regular graphs are separated from being bipartite,
which was first proved by Bollobás [10]. To put it in another way, it says that the independence ratio
(size of the largest independent set divided by the number of vertices) of a random d-regular graph
is at most 1/2 − ε0 with probability tending to 1 with the number of vertices for some ε0 > 0. We
can obtain this by applying Theorem 6 for the matrix M2 . In fact, δ(M, ε) ≤ 1/2 − ε, due to the
following argument. One of the states has probability at least 1/2, let us say state 0. Fix a neighbor
of the root. If the root is in state 0, and the random function is a covering at 0, then its neighbor is
in state 1. This event has probability at least 1/2 − ε, hence the probability of 1 is at least 1/2 − ε.
   Therefore                                         r              
                                    1          d                 d−1
                    ε0 = inf ε > 0 : [(1/2 − ε) − ε] ≤ ε log 2 ·      .
                                    2                            d−2
   About the best known bounds, see McKay [43] for small d. For large d, the independence ratio
of random d-regular graphs is concentrated around 2 log d/d [10, 49]. Our results do not improve
their bounds.


Remark 4.3 From Lemma 4.2 and Proposition 4.2 we obtain that any typical processes µ (and
thus any factor of i.i.d process) that satisfy the eigenfunction equation must take infinitely many
values. It would be good to see a finer statement about the possible value distributions. Maybe
these distributions are always Gaussian.

Remark 4.4 The proof of Theorem 6 makes use of the fact that c(G, M ) is continuous in the local-
global topology. The continuity of various combinatorial parameters in the Benjamini–Schramm
topology was studied in e.g. [1, 2, 19]. In those cases it is also possible to prove combinatorial
statements through continuity and the analytic properties of the limit objects.


Acknowledgement.

The authors are grateful to Miklós Abért and to Bálint Virág for helpful discussions and for organiz-
ing active seminars in Budapest related to this topic. The research was supported by the MTA Rényi
Institute Lendület Limits of Structures Research Group.



                                                  30
References
 [1] M. Abért, P. Csikvári and T. Hubai, Matching measure, Benjamini-Schramm convergence and
     the monomer-dimer free energy. Preprint, arXiv:1405.6740 [math-ph].

 [2] M. Abért, P. Csikvári, P. Frenkel and G. Kun, Matchings in Benjamini-Schramm convergent
     graph sequences. To appear in Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. arXiv:1405.3271 [math.CO].

 [3] D. Aldous and R. Lyons, Processes on unimodular random networks. Electron. J. Probab. 12
     (2007), no. 54, 1454–1508.

 [4] N. Alon and J. Spencer, The probabilistic method (2008), Wiley, New York.

 [5] Á. Backhausz, B. Szegedy and B. Virág, Ramanujan graphings and correlation decay in local
     algorithms. To appear in Random Structures Algorithms. DOI: 10.1002/rsa.20562

 [6] M. Bayati, D. Gamarnik and P. Tetali, Combinatorial approach to the interpolation method and
     scaling limits in sparse random graphs. Ann. Probab. 41 (2013), No. 6., 4080–4115.

 [7] I. Benjamini and O. Schramm, Recurrence of distributional limits of finite planar graphs. Elec-
     tron. J. Probab. 6 (2001), No. 23, 1–13.

 [8] N. Berger, C. Kenyon, E. Mossel and Y. Peres, Glauber dynamics on trees and hyperbolic
     graphs. Probab. Theory Related Fields 131 (2005), No. 3., 311-340.

 [9] B. Bollobás, Random Graphs (2001), Cambridge University Press, 2nd edititon.

[10] B. Bollobás, The independence ratio of regular graphs. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 83 (1981), No.
     2., 433–436.

[11] B. Bollobás and O. Riordan, Sparse graphs: Metrics and random models. Random Structures
     Algorithms 39 (2011), 1–38.

[12] L. Bowen, The ergodic theory of free group actions: entropy and the f-invariant. Groups Geom.
     Dyn. 4 (2010), no. 3, 419–432.

[13] R. Bubley and M. Dyer, Path coupling: A technique for proving rapid mixing in Markov
     chains. FOCS 97: Proceedings of the 38th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
     Science (1997), 223–231.

[14] E. Csóka, B. Gerencsér, V. Harangi and B. Virág, Invariant Gaussian processes and indepen-
     dent sets on regular graphs of large girth. To appear in Random Structures Algorithms. DOI:
     10.1002/rsa.20547

[15] E. Csóka and G. Lippner, Invariant random matchings in Cayley graphs. Preprint.
     arXiv:1211.2374 [math.CO].

[16] A. Dembo and A. Montanari, Ising models on locally tree-like graphs. Ann. Appl. Probab. 20
     (2010), no. 2, 367–783.

                                                31
[17] J. Ding, A. Sly and N. Sun, Maximum independent sets on random regular graphs. Preprint.
     arXiv:1310.4787 [math.PR]

[18] R. L. Dobrushin, Prescribing a system of random variables by conditional distributions. Theory
     Probab. Appl. (1970), 15 458–486.

[19] G. Elek and G. Lippner, Borel oracles. An analytic approach to constant time algorithms. Proc.
     Amer. Math. Soc. 138 (2010), 2939–2947.

[20] Y. Elon, Gaussian waves on the regular tree. Preprint. arXiv:0907.5065[math-ph].

[21] W. Evans, C. Kenyon, Y. Peres and L. J. Schulman, Broadcasting on trees and the Ising model.
     Ann. Appl. Probab. 10 (2000), no. 2, 410–433.

[22] J. Friedman, A proof of Alon’s second eigenvalue conjecture and related problems, Amer.
     Mathematical Society (2008)

[23] N. Friedman and D. Ornstein, On isomorphism of weak Bernoulli transformations. Adv. Math.
     5 (1971), 365–394.

[24] D. Gaboriau and R. Lyons, A measurable-group-theoretic solution to von Neumann’s problem.
     Invent. Math. 177 (2009), 533–540.

[25] D. Gamarnik and M. Sudan, Limits of local algorithms over sparse random graphs. Proceed-
     ings of the 5-th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science conference, ACM Special Inter-
     est Group on Algorithms and Computation Theory, 2014.

[26] D. Gamarnik and M. Sudan, Performance of the Survey Propagation-guided decimation algo-
     rithm for the random NAE-K-SAT problem. Preprint. arXiv:1402.0052 [math.PR].

[27] E. Glasner, Ergodic theory via joinings. American Mathematical Society, 2003.

[28] D. A. Goldberg, Higher order Markov random fields for independent sets. Preprint.
     arXiv:1301.1762 [math.PR].

[29] O. Häggström, J. Jonasson and R. Lyons, Coupling and Bernoullicity in random-cluster and
     Potts models. Bernoulli 8 (2002), no. 3, 275–294.

[30] V. Harangi and B. Virág, Independence ratio and random eigenvectors in transitive graphs.
     Preprint. arXiv:1308.5173 [math.PR].

[31] H. Hatami, L. Lovász and B. Szegedy, Limits of local-global convergent graph sequences.
     Geom. Funct. Anal. 24 (2014), no. 1, 269–296.

[32] C. Hoppen and N. Wormald, Local algorithms, regular graphs of large girth, and random
     regular graphs. Preprint. arXiv:1308.0266 [math.CO].

[33] C. D. Howard, Zero-temperature Ising spin dynamics on the homogeneous tree of degree three.
     J. Appl. Probab. 37 (2000), no. 3, 736–747.

                                                32
[34] S. Janson, T. Luczak and A. Rucinski, Random graphs (2000), John Wiley and Sons, Inc.

[35] G. Kun, Expanders have a spanning Lipschitz subgraph with large girth. Preprint.
     arXiv:1303.4982 [math.GR].

[36] D. A. Levin, Y. Peres and E. L. Wilmer, Markov chains and mixing times, American Mathe-
     matical Society, 2009.

[37] L. Lovász, Large Networks and Graph Limits, American Mathematical Society, 2012.

[38] E. Lubetzky and A. Sly, Information percolation for the stochastic Ising model. To appear in
     J. Amer. Math. Soc. arXiv:1401.6065 [math.PR].

[39] A. Lubotzky, R. Phillis and P. Sarnak, Ramanujan graphs. Combinatorica 8 (1988), no. 3,
     261–277.

[40] R. Lyons, Factors of iid on trees. To appear in Combin. Probab. Comput. arXiv:1401.4197
     [math.DS].

[41] R. Lyons and F. Nazarov, Perfect matchings as IID factors on non-amenable groups. European
     J. Combin. 32 (2011), 1115–1125.

[42] R. Lyons and A. Thom, Invariant coupling of determinantal measures on sofic groups. To
     appear in Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems. arXiv:1402.0969 [math.PR]

[43] B. D. McKay, Independent sets in regular graphs of high girth, Ars Combin. 23 (1987), A,
     179–185.

[44] P. Mester, Invariant monotone coupling nedd not exist. Ann. Probab. 41 (2013), no. 3a, 1180–
     1190.

[45] M. Molloy and B. Reed, The dominating number of a random cubic graph. Random Structures
     Algorithms 7 (1995), no. 3, 209–221.

[46] E. Mossel and A. Sly, Exact thresholds for Ising–Gibbs samplers on general graphs. Ann.
     Probab. 41 (2013), no. 1, 294–328.

[47] M. Rahman and B. Virág, Local algorithms for independent sets are half-optimal. Preprint.
     arXiv:1402.0485 [math.PR].

[48] J. Salas and A. D. Sokal, Absence of phase transition for antiferromagnetic Potts models via
     the Dobrushin uniqueness theorem. J. Stat. Phys. 86 (1997), no. 3–4, 551–579.

[49] A. Sly, Reconstruction for the Potts model, Ann. Probab. 39 (2011), no. 4, 1365–1406.

[50] D. Weitz, Combinatorial criteria for uniqueness of Gibbs measures, Random Structures Algo-
     rithms 27 (2005), no. 4, 445-475.




                                               33
