                                                 On the Strong Matroid Secretary Conjecture and Beyond∗

                                                                          Hamed Abdi          Kiarash Banihashem
                                                                     MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi    Danny Mittal
                                                                                     University of Maryland, College Park

                                                                                            September 16, 2026




arXiv:2609.19118v1 [cs.DS] 16 Sep 2026
                                                                                                    Abstract
                                                   The strong matroid secretary conjecture asserts that every matroid admits a 1/e-competitive secretary
                                               algorithm, matching the classical single-choice guarantee. We formulate a finite linear program whose
                                               value is the optimal ordinal competitive ratio of any fixed matroid; for all matroids of positive rank
                                               on seven elements and nearly all on eight, this value exceeds 1/e. The same computations suggested
                                               that the optimal ratio is monotone under truncation of the matroid; we prove this for uniform matroids,
                                               where the ratio is strictly increasing in the rank, and refute it for a graphic matroid. Guided by this
                                               evidence, we prove the conjecture for every linear matroid, a class that includes graphic matroids, regular
                                               matroids, laminar matroids, and gammoids, giving a 1/e-competitive ordinal secretary algorithm. The
                                               algorithm maintains bounds on the expected intersection dimension of the accepted span with every
                                               ambient subspace. Uncrossing and separation show that these bounds can be preserved while admitting
                                               each current greedy-basis element with a prescribed probability and the construction uses finite linear
                                               programs.
                                                   For every matroid, we also give a single-sample prophet algorithm with competitive ratio 1/2 in any
                                               fixed arrival order independent of the samples and values. Its output, including the selected values, has
                                               exactly the law of an independent fair thinning of an optimum from a fresh product draw. The algorithm
                                               uses O(n2 ) independence queries on n elements. Both constants are tight in their respective models.
                                               We also give a self-contained black-box reduction that converts a single-sample prophet ratio α into a
                                               secretary ratio α2 /16, preserving polynomial running time. Our single-sample algorithm consequently
                                               yields a 1/64-competitive ordinal secretary algorithm for arbitrary matroids.


                                         1     Introduction
                                         In the matroid secretary problem, an adversary assigns nonnegative weights to the n elements of a matroid.
                                         The elements then arrive in a uniformly random order, and the algorithm learns an element’s weight only
                                         when it arrives. Each element must be accepted or rejected immediately and irrevocably, and the accepted
                                         set must remain independent. The goal is to obtain, in expectation, a constant fraction of the weight of a
                                         maximum-weight independent set; the best such fraction guaranteed by an algorithm is its competitive ratio.
                                         In rank one, where any single element is independent, this is the classical secretary problem. The classical
                                         cutoff rule rejects roughly the first n/e arrivals and then accepts the first record, that is, the first arrival heavier
                                         than everything seen before. It selects the heaviest element with probability approaching 1/e [Fer89], and in
                                         the limit no algorithm does better, even one that observes the numerical weights [BHK+ 25, Theorem 15].
                                         Babaioff, Immorlica, and Kleinberg [BIK07, BIKK18] introduced the matroid generalization and asked
                                         whether a constant competitive ratio is possible for every matroid. The strong matroid secretary conjecture
                                         asks for the same constant as in rank one.
                                            ∗ This is a preliminary version. Due to time constraints it is being posted earlier than we would have liked, in order to record

                                         the results; the writing will be improved in future versions.




                                                                                                         1
Conjecture 1.1 (Strong matroid secretary conjecture). Every matroid admits a 1/e-competitive secretary
algorithm.

Two clarifications are needed. First, since 1/e is optimal in rank one, the conjecture asks for the best constant
that could hold for every matroid. Second, an algorithm is ordinal if it uses only the relative order of the
weights observed so far, together with the matroid; it never uses numerical values. In some matroids of higher
rank, numerical weights allow a better ratio than ordinal information does [CCJ15]. Throughout, we read
the conjecture as a statement about ordinal algorithms, which is the stronger reading, and all our secretary
algorithms are ordinal.
Before this work, the conjecture was open even without the constant: the best general guarantee was
of order 1/ log log r, where r is the rank [Lac14, FSZ15]. Corollary 1.4 below gives a constant ratio for
every matroid, and Theorem 1.2 gives the conjectured 1/e for every linear matroid. Previously, the strong
conjecture was known for uniform matroids: the ordinal virtual algorithm of Babaioff, Immorlica, Kempe, and
Kleinberg [BIKK07] is 1/e-competitive for every rank, and Corollary B.5 in Appendix B recovers this as a
consequence of strict monotonicity in the rank. It was also known for transversal matroids: the online bipartite-
matching algorithm of Kesselheim, Radke, Tönnis, and Vöcking [KRTV13] is asymptotically 1/e-competitive
and admits an ordinal implementation in this setting, and Soto, Turkieltaub, and Verdugo [STV21] give
the exact 1/e per-element guarantee. For graphic matroids, the previously best known ratio was 1/3.95,
approaching 1/e only as the girth grows [BHK+ 25].
To see where the difficulty lies, recall why the cutoff rule works. Suppose the heaviest element arrives at time
t after the cutoff s. It is a record, and it is accepted exactly when no record appeared at times s + 1, . . . , t − 1,
which happens when the heaviest of the first t − 1 arrivals lies among the first s; this has probability s/(t − 1).
Nothing else can go wrong: if no record appeared at those times, nothing has been accepted, so the slot is free
when the heaviest element arrives. In a matroid, the natural candidate at time t is an element of the greedy
basis of the observed set, and every element of the full greedy basis B(w) is such a candidate whenever it has
arrived. But the algorithm may already have accepted a set that spans the candidate, even a small one. A
bound on the number of accepted elements does not prevent this. What must be controlled is the span of the
accepted set, and since the adversary chooses the weights, it must be controlled in every direction at once.
Our starting point was computational. For a fixed matroid, the optimal ordinal competitive ratio is the value
of a finite linear program, which we describe in Section 3 and prove correct in Appendix A. To our knowledge
this is the first program that computes this ratio for an arbitrary fixed matroid. We solved it for all matroids
of positive rank on seven elements and nearly all on eight, and in every case the optimal ratio exceeded 1/e.1
This evidence for the strong conjecture led us to seek a proof, and the structure of the optimal solutions
guided the construction we present.
We prove the strong conjecture for every linear matroid, using a computationally unrestricted ordinal algorithm.
A matroid is linear if it can be represented by vectors over some field, with independence meaning linear
independence. Linear matroids include essentially all of the classes of matroids that are usually considered:
uniform and partition matroids, graphic and cographic matroids, regular matroids (those representable over
every field), transversal matroids and more generally gammoids [Lin73, IP73], and laminar matroids, which are
gammoids [Fin11, FO17]. For all of these, Theorem 1.2 gives the ratio 1/e, the best constant that can hold for
every matroid; previously, 1/e was known for uniform and transversal matroids [BIKK07, KRTV13, STV21],
constant ratios were known for some other classes [BIK07, STV21], and no constant at all was known for
linear matroids in general. Non-linear matroids exist, and in the enumerative sense almost all matroids are
non-linear [Nel18]; for them, Corollary 1.4 still provides a constant ratio. The algorithm behind Theorem 1.2
controls exactly the quantity identified above: the expected dimension of the intersection of the accepted
span with every subspace.
Our second result concerns the single-sample matroid prophet inequality. In this model, each element has
an independent random value drawn from a distribution that is not revealed to the algorithm; instead, the
algorithm receives one independent sample from each distribution before the arrivals begin. The arrival order
can be arbitrary, provided it is fixed independently of the samples and actual values. With full knowledge
of the distributions, the optimal guarantee for matroids is 1/2 [KW12]. We show that one sample per
   1 Code and data for these computations are available at https://github.com/TlatoaniHJ/MatroidSecretary; the repository

is released as is, for full disclosure.


                                                           2
distribution suffices for the same guarantee in every matroid, through an algorithm whose output has an exact
distributional description: the selected labels and their values are distributed as an independent fair thinning
of an optimal basis from a fresh draw. A self-contained reduction then converts this into a polynomial-time
1/64-competitive ordinal secretary algorithm for every matroid, settling the original conjecture of Babaioff et
al. that every matroid admits a constant competitive ratio.2


1.1     Our results
Throughout, the algorithm is given the ground set and matroid before arrivals. Let B(w) be the greedy basis
under a fixed rule for breaking ties; its weight is the optimum OPT(w). Table 1 summarizes the results.

                 Model                         Matroids       Ratio          Computation
                 Ordinal secretary             linear         1/e (tight)    finite; no polynomial bound
                 Single-sample prophet         all            1/2 (tight)    O(n2 ) independence queries
                 Ordinal secretary             all            1/64           polynomial

Table 1: Summary of results. The two constants are tight in their models: 1/e for secretary algorithms and
1/2 for single-sample prophet inequalities, both already in rank one.

Theorem 1.2 (Linear matroid secretary). Let M be a linear matroid on n ≥ 2 elements. For each 1 ≤ s < n,
there is an ordinal secretary algorithm (Algorithm 1) returning an independent set A such that, for every
nonnegative weight vector w, each element of B(w) is selected with probability exactly
                                                                       n−1
                                                                   sX1
                                                        cn (s) =       .
                                                                   n k
                                                                       k=s

In particular, choosing s from n alone gives expected weight at least OPT(w)/e. The algorithm is a finite
construction using linear programs; no polynomial running-time bound is asserted.

The quantity cn (s) is exactly the probability with which the classical cutoff rule with cutoff s selects the
heaviest of n elements: the heaviest element arrives at a uniform time t, andPis selected when t > s and the
                                                                                 n
heaviest of the previous t − 1 arrivals lies among the first s. Thus cn (s) = n1 t=s+1 t−1
                                                                                        s
                                                                                           , which tends to 1/e
when s/n → 1/e. Our algorithm gives every element of the optimal basis this same selection probability.
The construction works with a representation over a finite field. This does not restrict the theorem’s scope:
every finite linear matroid has such a representation by Rado’s theorem [Rad57], and one can find it by
exhaustive search from the matroid before arrivals begin.
The per-element conclusion is a probability-competitive guarantee in the terminology of Soto, Turkieltaub,
and Verdugo [STV21]. It is stronger than a bound on the expected weight. If H is any prefix of the weight
order, greedy selects exactly rankM (H) elements from H, so our policy satisfies E|A ∩ H| ≥ cn (s) rankM (H)
for every such prefix simultaneously, without knowing which prefix will be used to evaluate it. Summation by
parts (Section 2) turns these prefix bounds into the weighted bound. The asymptotic constant 1/e cannot be
improved, already in rank one, even by algorithms that observe numerical weights [BHK+ 25, Theorem 15].
Theorem 1.3 (Single-sample matroid prophet). Let M be any matroid, and let (Xe )e∈E be independent
nonnegative values. Given one independent sample from each value distribution, an online algorithm selects
an independent set A satisfying
                                         X         1
                                       E     Xe = E OPT(X).
                                                   2
                                                   e∈A

   2 Independently and concurrently, Singla [Sin26] also resolved the constant-ratio conjecture, with an ordinal algorithm that

accepts each element of the optimum with probability at least 1/4 for every matroid, without knowing the matroid in advance.
The two works are incomparable: for linear matroids we obtain the optimal constant 1/e, while for general matroids our constant
1/64 is weaker than his 1/4. Singla also obtains a constant-competitive single-sample matroid prophet inequality, with ratio 1/8;
Theorem 1.3 gives the tight ratio 1/2.


                                                                   3
The guarantee holds in every fixed order independent of the samples and values. The algorithm uses at most
n + 1 greedy scans, and hence O(n2 ) independence queries. No factor larger than 1/2 holds uniformly, even
in rank one when the algorithm is given the distributions.

The equality is not a coincidence of the analysis. Section 5 proves that the selected labels together with their
values have exactly the law of an independent fair thinning of the optimal basis of a fresh draw from the
value distributions, so the factor 1/2 is the thinning probability.
The two results have different computational requirements. The secretary construction maintains constraints
for a finite but potentially very large collection of subspaces. The prophet algorithm updates one stored value
vector and recomputes a greedy basis when an element arrives. It uses only an independence oracle for the
matroid.
The single-sample result also yields a secretary guarantee for arbitrary matroids.
Corollary 1.4 (General matroid secretary). Every matroid admits a polynomial-time 1/64-competitive
ordinal secretary algorithm.

The implication from constant-sample prophet inequalities to a constant secretary guarantee is recorded by
Fu et al. [FLT+ 24], who attribute it to Wenzheng Li (2023, personal communication). We did not have access
to that argument, so Theorem 6.1 gives a self-contained reduction converting any single-sample prophet ratio
α into a secretary ratio α2 /16, while preserving polynomial running time. Instantiating this reduction with
our 1/2-competitive algorithm proves the corollary. The reduction uses only the expected prophet guarantee,
not the distributional identity.
Further results. Section 3 presents the linear program that computes the optimal ordinal secretary ratio
ρ(M ) of any fixed matroid M , the computations we performed with it, and the conjecture they suggested;
Appendix A proves that its value is exactly ρ(M ) (Theorem A.2), so in particular the supremum defining
ρ(M ) is attained. Appendix B studies how ρ behaves under truncation of the matroid. For uniform matroids
the ratio is strictly increasing in the rank (Theorem B.2), which recovers the known 1/e guarantee for
uniform matroids [BIKK07] (Corollary B.5); a graphic matroid shows that this monotonicity fails in general
(Theorem B.6).


1.2    Techniques
The invariant for linear matroids. Fix a cutoff s and a linear matroid represented by vectors ve . Write W (A)
for the span of the vectors of an accepted set A. Our policy will accept each greedy-basis candidate arriving
at time t > s with probability exactly at = s/(t − 1), conditional on the observed set and on the identity of
the arrival, which gives every element of the optimum the classical probability cn (s). For this, the candidate
must be available: its vector must not lie in W (A). In rank one, the relevant statistic is the probability that
the slot is used, and the cutoff rule keeps it equal to βt = 1 − s/t after t arrivals. For a linear matroid we
maintain, for every subspace U of the ambient space,

                                         E dim(W (A) ∩ U ) ≤ βt dim U.

Applied to the line spanned by a candidate ve , this says that the candidate is blocked with probability at
most βt−1 , so at least 1 − βt−1 = at of the probability mass is free to accept it. This is exactly the mass we
need to spend. Constraints on lines of ground vectors alone would not suffice; Section 4.2 gives an example,
and the proof genuinely uses constraints at subspaces that no set of ground vectors generates.
Preserving the invariant. Spending mass at on accepting ve raises the load dim(W (A) ∩ U ) by one at each
accepting state A with ve ∈ W (A) + U . The question is whether the mass can be placed so that no constraint
is violated. Along a chain of subspaces the sets of expensive states are nested, so there is a single order of the
states that is cheapest for every member of the chain at once; placing the mass in that order preserves all the
chain’s constraints, by a short calculation that uses the invariant at U and at U + ⟨ve ⟩. An arbitrary family
of subspaces admits no common order. We therefore consider a nonnegative combination of the constraints
and uncross it: replacing two incomparable subspaces U, T by U ∩ T and U + T keeps the total dimension
and can only increase the total load, so every combination is dominated by a chain. Hence every single


                                                        4
combination can be satisfied, and a minimax argument (separation in a finite-dimensional space) yields one
placement satisfying all constraints simultaneously. This last step works only on average over the identity of
the last arrival, because the candidates form an independent set and an independent set has at most dim U
vectors in U . That average is exactly what a uniformly random arrival order provides.
From the recursion to an online policy. The argument defines, for each observed set S with its relative
weight order, a law µS on accepted sets, together with transition rules that modify each µS−e by admitting e;
the average of the modified laws over e is µS . The online policy, when e arrives with observed set S and
accepted set A, flips a coin whose bias is read off the transition rule at A. Because the recursion uses only the
relative weight order on S, everything it needs is available at decision time. Section 4 presents the policy as
pseudocode first and then proves that it is well defined and has the claimed guarantee; in rank one it reduces
exactly to the classical cutoff rule.
Maintaining a thinned optimum. A fair thinning of a set retains each of its elements independently with
probability 1/2. The prophet algorithm stores a vector, initially the samples, and keeps its accepted set
inside the greedy basis of the stored vector. When an element arrives, the algorithm may overwrite its stored
coordinate with the actual value, and it couples this overwrite with the acceptance decision so that two
properties hold at all times: the stored vector has the original product distribution, and conditional on it the
accepted set is a fair thinning of the processed part of its greedy basis. A one-coordinate change moves a
greedy basis by at most one exchange, so only the arriving element and a possibly displaced basis element
are involved. The critical case is a displaced element that has already arrived: if it was accepted, the new
element must be rejected, and if it was rejected, the new element is accepted with probability one; since the
earlier acceptance was a fair bit, the average is 1/2. The proof fixes the two draws of each coordinate as an
unordered pair and tracks the fair bit that says which one is currently stored.
Secretary guarantees from samples. To use a prophet algorithm for the secretary problem, a rejected prefix of
the arrivals plays the role of the samples. The obstacle is that the prophet algorithm may later decide to
select one of those already rejected elements, which cannot be implemented. Three moves handle this. A
preliminary half-sample filters the instance to elements not spanned by heavier sample elements, so that the
expected total weight of all remaining candidates is at most the optimum, while half the optimum survives.
Then each remaining element is independently activated with a small probability q, both as a sample and as
a value, so that the useful prophet reward is linear in q while the unimplementable selections, which require
both activations, cost only q 2 . Finally, an exact interleaving of the stored prefix with the physical arrivals
produces a virtual arrival order independent of the activations, as the prophet guarantee requires. Optimizing
q gives α2 /16.


1.3    Related work
Babaioff et al. [BIK07, BIKK18] introduced the matroid secretary problem and obtained constant ratios
for several classes. For general matroids, Lachish [Lac14] and Feldman, Svensson, and Zenklusen [FSZ15]
gave algorithms with competitive ratio Ω(1/ log log r), the best known before this work. Concurrently and
independently, Singla [Sin26] obtained a 1/4 probability-competitive ordinal algorithm for all matroids and
a 1/8-competitive single-sample prophet inequality; see the footnote in the introduction for a comparison.
For uniform matroids, Babaioff, Immorlica, Kempe, and Kleinberg [BIKK07] gave ordinal 1/e-competitive
algorithms for every rank, Kleinberg [Kle05] obtained a ratio of 1 − O(r−1/2 ), and Chan, Chen, and
Jiang [CCJ15] determined optimal thresholds for small capacities, showing in particular that numerical
information improves the optimal ratio for rank two. For graphic matroids, Banihashem et al. [BHK+ 25]
obtained a 1/3.95 guarantee and a guarantee approaching 1/e as the girth grows, together with a matching
high-girth hardness bound; we use that hardness result in Appendix B. Soto, Turkieltaub, and Verdugo [STV21]
introduced probability-competitive guarantees and a forbidden-set framework giving them for graphic, laminar,
and other classes, including the optimal 1/e for transversal matroids, where Kesselheim, Radke, Tönnis,
and Vöcking [KRTV13] had obtained an asymptotic 1/e for the expected weight. Buchbinder, Jain, and
Singh [BJS14] characterized optimal policies for the classical and multiple-choice secretary problems by linear
programs; Section 3 and Appendix A extend the approach to arbitrary matroids.
Prophet inequalities compare against the expected optimum of independent values with known distributions.
Kleinberg and Weinberg [KW12] proved the tight 1/2 matroid prophet inequality. Azar, Kleinberg, and


                                                       5
Weinberg [AKW14] introduced prophet inequalities with limited sample access, and Rubinstein, Wang, and
Weinberg [RWW20] showed that one sample suffices for the tight rank-one guarantee. For general matroids,
Fu et al. [FLT+ 24] obtained a (1/4 − ε) guarantee from Oε (log4 n) samples per distribution, and Feldman,
Svensson, and Zenklusen [FSZ26] reduced the requirement to Oε (log n + log r log2 log r) samples through
sample-based online contention resolution. Those guarantees permit arrival orders that depend on the realized
samples and values, whereas ours requires the order to be fixed independently of them; in exchange we use
one sample and obtain the optimal constant.
Organization. Section 2 fixes notation and the two models. Section 3 describes the linear program for
the optimal ordinal ratio, the computations, and the truncation conjecture. Section 4 presents the linear-
matroid secretary algorithm and proves Theorem 1.2; Section 5 does the same for the prophet algorithm and
Theorem 1.3; and Section 6 derives the secretary consequences. Appendix A states the program in full and
proves its correctness. Appendix B proves that the optimal ratio is monotone under truncation for uniform
matroids and that this fails for a graphic matroid.


2     Preliminaries
Let M = (E, I) be a finite matroid with rank function r and closure operator clM . We allow loops and parallel
elements. The ground set and matroid are known in advance; algorithms may query independence of arbitrary
subsets of E.PWe write S + e and S − e for adjoining and removing an element. For a nonnegative vector w,
put w(S) = e∈S we and OPT(w) = maxI∈I w(I); OPT(w|S ) denotes the optimum on the restriction M |S.
All logarithms are natural.
Fix a total priority order on labels, independently of all weights and randomness. Greedy scans elements
in decreasing weight, using this priority to break ties, and accepts an element exactly when it preserves
independence. We scan zero-weight elements as well, so the output B(w) is a basis. For a restriction to S,
write Bw (S), or simply B(S) when the weights are understood.
Three standard greedy properties will be used repeatedly. First, w(B(S)) = OPT(w|S ). Second, if e ∈ B(S)
and e ∈ T ⊆ S, then e ∈ B(T ). Indeed, greedy selects e precisely when the elements preceding it in the
greedy order do not span it; deleting elements cannot destroy this property. Third, for every prefix H of the
greedy order on S, |B(S) ∩ H| = r(H).
In the secretary model the weights are fixed before an independent uniform permutation of E is drawn. An
arrival is a record if it precedes every earlier arrival in the weight order, including the fixed tie priority. A
policy returning A is c-competitive if Ew(A) ≥ c OPT(w) for every nonnegative weight vector w. An ordinal
policy uses only the strict relative order of weights revealed so far, with the fixed tie rule. A guarantee
E|A ∩ H| ≥ cr(H) for every weight prefix implies a weighted c-competitive guarantee. To see this, list the
elements in weight order as e1 , . . . , en , put Hj = {e1 , . . . , ej }, and set wen+1 = 0. Summation by parts gives
                           n
                           X                                                n
                                                                            X
                Ew(A) =          (wej − wej+1 )E|A ∩ Hj |,       OPT(w) =     (wej − wej+1 )r(Hj ).               (1)
                           j=1                                              j=1

For ordinal policies the converse holds as well: approach the indicator of a prefix by positive weight vectors
preserving the given strict order. The decision law stays fixed, so taking the limit recovers that prefix’s
inequality.
In the single-sample prophet model, Xe has distribution De , independently across e. The algorithm first
receives independent samples Se ∼ De , independent also of X. It does not know the distributions. The
arrival order is fixed independently of all samples, values, and internal random coins; the algorithm need not
know it in advance. A random order independent      of these variables is also permitted, by conditioning on the
order. Competitive ratios compare E e∈A Xe with E OPT(X); one may assume the latter is finite. The
                                        P
distributional identities below remain valid without this integrability assumption.




                                                             6
3      The optimal ordinal ratio as a linear program
For a matroid M of positive rank, let ρ(M ) denote its optimal ordinal secretary ratio: the supremum of all
c for which some ordinal policy is c-competitive on M . In this notation, the strong conjecture for ordinal
algorithms asserts that ρ(M ) ≥ 1/e for every matroid. A natural starting point for answer this question is to
ask how ρ(M ) can be computed for a given matroid. We answer that question in this section via a finite
linear program whose value is exactly ρ(M ), and describe the implications we drew from it. The program
and the proof of its correctness are in Appendix A; the proofs concerning the truncation conjecture discussed
at the end of this section are in Appendix B.
The program. Fix M with n elements. Since policies are ordinal, a weight vector matters only through
the strict total order it induces on E (ties broken by the fixed priority), which we call the weight order.
The observation behind the program is that, for an ordinal policy, the probability that after t arrivals the
observed set is S and the accepted set is A depends on the hidden weight order only through its restriction
to S (Lemma A.1). A state is therefore a pair (σ, A), where σ lists an observed set in decreasing weight
order and A ⊆ Sσ is independent. The program has a variable pσ,A for the probability of each state, and
variables yσ,e,A and zσ,e,A for the probabilities of accepting and rejecting e when it arrives with prior state
(σ − e, A). Its constraints are flow conservation, which says that after a state the next label is uniform among
the unobserved labels and is either accepted or rejected, and that each state is reached through its possible
last arrivals; feasibility, which forbids dependent acceptances; and competitiveness, which requires, for every
weight order π and every prefix H of π, that the accepted elements of H number at least c r(H) in expectation.
The objective is to maximize c. The competitiveness constraints are the prefix form of c-competitiveness,
equivalent to the weighted form for ordinal policies by (1). Because a single set of variables is shared by all
weight orders inducing the same relative order on an observed set, one program encodes the entire adversarial
problem at once.
Theorem 3.1 (Theorem A.2, restated informally). For every matroid with a nonloop, the value of the
program (16) is ρ(M ). Every feasible solution with objective c yields a c-competitive ordinal policy that
depends only on the observed weight order, the arriving label, and the accepted set, and the supremum defining
ρ(M ) is attained by such a policy.
Linear programming characterizations of secretary policies go back to Buchbinder, Jain, and Singh [BJS14],
who treated the classical and multiple-choice problems, that is, rank one and uniform matroids, where a
policy’s situation is summarized by the time and the number of acceptances so far. For a general matroid the
accepted set and the observed weight order both matter, and the program above indexes states by them; to
our knowledge it is the first formulation that computes ρ(M ) for an arbitrary matroid. Its size grows faster
than exponentially in n, but symmetries of M and the merging of states that admit the same future decisions
reduce it substantially without changing its value (Appendix A.5).
Using the catalogue of all matroids on at most nine elements compiled by Mayhew and Royle [MR08], we
solved the program to compute ρ(M ) for all matroids of positive rank on seven elements and for nearly all
such matroids on eight elements.3 In every case the optimal ratio exceeded 1/e, and furthermore in every
case the optimal ratio for a matroid on n elements exceeded the optimal ratio for the rank-1 matroid on
n elements (with the exception of said matroid itself). This served as significant evidence for the strong
conjecture.
We additionally describe other investigations performed based on evidence from the results of the linear
program. For 1 ≤ k ≤ r(M ), the rank-k truncation M (k) of M is the matroid on the same ground set whose
independent sets are the independent sets of M of size at most k; thus M (r(M )) = M , and M (1) is the
rank-one matroid whose nonloops are the nonloops of M . The rank-one problem is the classical secretary
problem, so ρ(M (1) ) ≥ 1/e. If ρ(M (k) ) were nondecreasing in k, the strong conjecture would follow at once:
ρ(M ) ≥ ρ(M (1) ) ≥ 1/e. The computed values of ρ on small matroids and their truncations were consistent
with this monotonicity, and we conjectured it.
Conjecture 3.2 (Truncation monotonicity; false in general). For every matroid M and every 2 ≤ k ≤ r(M ),
ρ(M (k) ) ≥ ρ(M (k−1) ).
    3 The implementation and its outputs are available at https://github.com/TlatoaniHJ/MatroidSecretary, released as is for

full disclosure.


                                                             7
The conjecture is true for uniform matroids, where truncation only lowers the capacity: Theorem B.2 shows
that ρ(Uk,n ) is strictly increasing in k, which recovers the known 1/e guarantee for uniform matroids [BIKK07]
(Corollary B.5). It is false in general. The refutation came from our earlier high-girth hardness result for
graphic matroids [BHK+ 25]: a graph of girth at least four has rank-three truncation equal to a uniform
matroid, whose ratio exceeds 0.53, while there are graphic matroids of arbitrarily large girth whose optimal
ratios are arbitrarily close to 1/e. Theorem B.6 gives a self-contained counterexample on K2,N , and since
its upper bound allows the algorithm to observe numerical weights, the conjecture fails without the ordinal
restriction as well. The failure of this route is part of why the proof of Section 4 controls the accepted span
directly rather than arguing by rank.


4      A tight guarantee for matroid secretary on linear matroids
This section proves Theorem 1.2. We present the algorithm first, in Section 4.1, as pseudocode built on a
recursively defined family of probability laws and linear programs. The remainder of the section explains why
the algorithm is well defined and why it has the claimed guarantee. Section 4.2 introduces the invariant that
controls the accepted set. Section 4.3 shows how to admit a new element while preserving the invariant along
a chain of subspaces, and how to reduce arbitrary collections of subspaces to chains by uncrossing. Section 4.4
combines these with a minimax argument to show that the algorithm’s linear programs are always feasible.
Section 4.5 verifies that the online coins implement the recursion and computes the selection probabilities,
and Section 4.6 chooses the cutoff.
We first obtain a representation over a finite field. Rado’s theorem [Rad57] guarantees that one exists for every
finite linear matroid, including those initially represented over an infinite field. If no finite-field representation
is supplied, enumerate finite fields and matrices with rank(M ) rows and n columns, testing each matrix
against the independence relation of M on all subsets. This search terminates under the promise that M is
linear and can be performed before any weights are observed.
Fix the resulting representation (ve )e∈E in a finite-dimensional vector space V over a finite field. We may
replace V by the span of the represented vectors. For any subset A ⊆ E, write W (A) = span{ve : e ∈ A},
and for a subspace U ≤ V define the load of A at U as

                                            ℓU (A) = dim(W (A) ∩ U ).

For a probability law µ on independent sets and β ≥ 0, call µ β-bounded if

                               LU := EA∼µ ℓU (A) ≤ β dim U          for every U ≤ V.                              (2)

Since V is finite, there are finitely many subspaces and finitely many independent sets, so (2) is a finite
system of linear inequalities in the values of µ.


4.1     The algorithm
Fix a cutoff 1 ≤ s < n. The algorithm rejects the first s arrivals. For t ≥ s, put
                  s                s                                                               at
          βt = 1 − ,       at =          (t > s),     so that      βt−1 + at = 1    and βt−1 +        = βt .      (3)
                  t               t−1                                                              t
The number βt is the bound the algorithm maintains after t arrivals, and at is the probability with which it
admits a greedy-basis candidate arriving at time t. In rank one these are the classical cutoff rule’s probability
that the slot is already used after t arrivals and its acceptance probability of a record at time t.
For an observed set S with a given relative weight order, the algorithm uses a law µS on independent subsets
of S and, for each e ∈ S, a transition qeS that modifies µS−e by admitting e; the average over e ∈ S of the
modified laws is µS . These are defined recursively as follows.
Definition 4.1 (The laws µS and transitions q S ). Let S ⊆ E with a relative weight order, and let t = |S|.
    (i) If t ≤ s, then µS is the point mass at ∅.


                                                          8
 (ii) If t > s, let B = B(S) be the greedy basis of S under the given order, and assume µS−e has been
      defined for every e ∈ S, with respect to the weight order restricted to S − e. Consider the transition
      program (PS ) in the variables qe (A), for e ∈ S and independent A ⊆ S − e:
                                 0 ≤ qe (A) ≤ µS−e (A),                                                      (4a)
                                 qe (A) = 0                 if ve ∈ W (A) or e ∈
                                                                               / B,                          (4b)
                                                            for every e ∈ B,                                  (4c)
                                 P
                                     A qe (A) = at
                                 gU (q) ≤ βt dim U          for every subspace U ≤ V,                        (4d)
      where gU (q) is the expected load at U after choosing e ∈ S uniformly and moving mass qe (A) from A
      to A + e under µS−e :
                                 1 X hX                     X                            i
                        gU (q) =          µS−e (A) ℓU (A) +    qe (A) ℓU (A + e) − ℓU (A) .            (5)
                                 t
                                   e∈S   A                      A

      Let q S be a canonical feasible solution of (PS ), for example the lexicographically smallest one. Define
      µS as the resulting average law: for independent A′ ⊆ S,
                                                    (
                                              1 X µS−e (A′ ) − q S (A′ ) e ∈  / A′ ,
                                   µS (A′ ) =                      e
                                                                                                            (6)
                                              t
                                                e∈S
                                                      qeS (A′ − e)          e ∈ A′ .

Constraint (4a) says that qe moves part of the mass that µS−e places at A to A + e; (4b) forbids dependent
additions and admits only greedy-basis elements; (4c) says that each greedy-basis element is admitted with
total probability at ; and (4d) asks that the averaged law remain βt -bounded. The definition makes sense only
if (PS ) is feasible and each µS−e is a probability law; both are established in Section 4.4. The program is
finite, with rational data, since the weights enter only through their order.

 Algorithm 1: Ordinal secretary policy for a linear matroid
   Input: A representation (ve )e∈E of M over a finite field; a cutoff 1 ≤ s < n.
 1 Initialize A ← ∅
 2 for t = 1, . . . , n, with arriving element e and observed set S (so |S| = t) do
 3     if t ≤ s then reject e
 4     else
 5         Compute µS−e and q S from the observed relative weight order on S, by Definition 4.1
 6         With probability qeS (A)/µS−e (A) (zero if µS−e (A) = 0), accept e and set A ← A + e;
            otherwise reject e
 7 return A



Algorithm 1 is ordinal: the recursion uses only the relative weight order on subsets of S and the fixed
representation, so all its inputs are available when e arrives. It is well defined by Proposition 4.2 below, which
also shows that the acceptance probability lies in [0, 1] and that accepted sets are independent. The recursion
can be evaluated exactly: all subspaces and independent sets can be enumerated over the finite field, the
programs have rational coefficients, and canonical rational solutions can be chosen. The number of states and
constraints can be enormous, which is why no running-time bound is claimed.
Proposition 4.2 (Well-definedness). For every S with relative weight order and |S| ≥ s, the law µS is a
probability law on independent subsets of S and is β|S| -bounded. For |S| > s the program (PS ) is feasible.
Proposition 4.3 (Selection probabilities). Under Algorithm 1, for every weight vector w and every e ∈ B(E),
conditional on the observed set S containing e with e arriving last at time t > s, the element e is accepted
with probability exactly at . Consequently Pr(e ∈ A) = cn (s).

Theorem 1.2 follows from these two propositions and the choice of cutoff in Section 4.6. The recursion is, in
the language of Appendix A, an explicit feasible solution of the per-element version of the ordinal secretary
program, built one observed set at a time.


                                                        9
The algorithm in rank one. If M has rank one and no loops, then V is a line, its only subspaces are 0 and
V , the greedy basis of S is its heaviest element, and an accepted set is either empty or a singleton whose
span is V . We claim that µS (∅) = 1 − βt = s/t for |S| = t ≥ s. This holds for t = s. For t > s, the only
row of (PS ) with a nonzero quota is that of the heaviest element e of S, and its quota at = s/(t − 1) equals
µS−e (∅) by induction, so (4c) forces qeS(∅) = µS−e (∅); the constraint at V then holds with equality by (3),
and (6) gives µS (∅) = 1t (t − 1) t−1
                                   s
                                      + 0 = s/t. Algorithm 1 therefore accepts an arrival with probability one
exactly when t > s, the arrival is a record, and nothing has been accepted: this is the classical cutoff rule,
and βt = 1 − s/t is the probability that it has accepted something by time t. The subspace invariant is what
replaces the single number βt in higher rank.


4.2    The subspace invariant
We first give intuition as to why it is necessary to control the load at every subspace, rather than simply
those of dimension 1. For a nonzero vector v, the constraint at the line ⟨v⟩ gives

                                        Pr(v ∈ W (A)) = Eℓ⟨v⟩ (A) ≤ β,                                         (7)

so at least 1 − β of the probability mass permits adding v. By the schedule (3), after t − 1 arrivals this is
exactly at , the mass we wish to spend on a candidate arriving at time t. Lines of ground vectors would
suffice for availability alone. They do not suffice to propagate the invariant, and the constraints on spans
of ground elements are strictly weaker than (2). For example, let u1 , u2 , u3 be a basis of F32 , take ground
vectors u1 , u2 , u1 + u3 , u2 + u3 , and choose A uniformly from the first and last pairs. The expected loads
of ground-generated lines and planes are at most 1/2 and 3/2, respectively, while V has load 2. These
constraints hold with β = 3/4, yet the common line ⟨u1 + u2 ⟩ of the two possible spans has load 1. The
proofs below use the constraint at U + ⟨ve ⟩ to control the cost of an addition at U , and such subspaces are in
general not generated by ground vectors.
Two identities describe how a load changes under one-dimensional extensions:

                dim((W + ⟨v⟩) ∩ U ) − dim(W ∩ U ) = 1{v ∈ W + U },                        v∈
                                                                                           / W,                (8)
                dim(W ∩ (U + ⟨v⟩)) − dim(W ∩ U ) = 1{v ∈ W + U },                         v∈
                                                                                           / U.                (9)

Both follow by expressing an intersection dimension as the sum of the two dimensions minus the dimension of
their sum. In the first identity, adjoining v increases dim W by one; in the second, it increases dim U by one.
The corresponding sum increases in dimension exactly when v ∈       / W + U . Identity (8) says that accepting
e raises the load at U by one precisely at states with ve ∈ W (A) + U ; we call such states expensive for U .
Identity (9) says that, when ve ∈ / U , the probability of an expensive state is the difference between the loads
at U + ⟨ve ⟩ and at U , which the invariant bounds.


4.3    Admitting an element along a chain
An addition rule for a represented element e specifies masses q(A) with 0 ≤ q(A) ≤ µ(A), and q(A) = 0
whenever ve ∈ W (A). It retains mass µ(A) − q(A) at A and moves mass q(A) to A + e. Splitting an atom in
this way is implemented by a randomized decision conditional on that accepted set; this is what Algorithm 1
does. The first lemma handles a chain of subspaces, where a single order of the states is cheapest for all
members at once.

Lemma 4.4 (Chain admission). Let µ be β-bounded, let ve ̸= 0, and suppose a ≥ 0 and β + a ≤ 1. For every
finite chain of subspaces C1 ⊆ · · · ⊆ Cm , there is a feasible addition rule of total mass a whose updated law
satisfies EℓU (A′ ) ≤ β dim U + a1{ve ∈ U } for every subspace U in the chain.

Proof. For each chain member U , let DU = {A : ve ∈ W (A) + U } be the set of expensive states, and let
pU = µ(DU ). If U ⊆ U ′ then DU ⊆ DU ′ , so the sets DC1 ⊆ · · · ⊆ DCm are nested. Every infeasible state,
one with ve ∈ W (A), lies in every DU . Assign each feasible state A the index i(A) = min{i : A ∈ DCi }, with
i(A) = m + 1 if A lies in no DCi . Fill mass a into feasible states in decreasing order of i(A), splitting the last


                                                        10
atom if needed, so that the rule uses states outside DCj before any state inside DCj , simultaneously for every
j. Such a rule exists because the feasible mass is at least 1 − β ≥ a by (7).
Fix a chain member U . Every state outside DU is feasible, and the rule fills those states first; their total
mass is 1 − pU . By (8), the load at U increases only on the mass placed inside DU , which is exactly
(a − (1 − pU ))+ = (a − 1 + pU )+ . If ve ∈
                                          / U , equation (9) gives pU = LU +⟨ve ⟩ − LU , and the invariant at U
and at U + ⟨ve ⟩ gives LU ≤ β dim U and LU + pU ≤ β(dim U + 1). Consequently,
                        LU + (a − 1 + pU )+ = max{LU , LU + pU + a − 1} ≤ β dim U,
where the last inequality uses β + a ≤ 1. If ve ∈ U , then DU is everything, so every feasible addition increases
the load by one and the expected increase is a.

The chain provides a common ordering of the feasible states for all its constraints. An arbitrary collection of
subspaces need not admit such an ordering. We next show that a priced collection can be dominated by a
chain without increasing its dimension budget. Figure 1 illustrates the step.

               U +T
                                             dim U + dim T = dim(U ∩ T ) + dim(U + T )

      U                     T                dim(W ∩ U ) + dim(W ∩ T ) ≤ dim(W ∩ U ∩ T ) + dim(W ∩ (U + T ))

                                             for every subspace W
               U ∩T

Figure 1: Uncrossing two incomparable subspaces U, T into U ∩ T and U + T . The dimension budget is
preserved and the load of every W can only increase, so a priced family of constraints is dominated by a
chain.

Lemma 4.5 (Subspace uncrossing). For nonnegative rational prices (λU )U ≤V , there are a chain C1 ⊆ · · · ⊆
Cm and nonnegative rational coefficients γ1 , . . . , γm such that, for every W ≤ V ,
             X                       X                              X              X
                 λU dim(W ∩ U ) ≤        γi dim(W ∩ Ci ),               λU dim U =    γi dim Ci .     (10)
                 U                       i                          U               i

Proof. Clear denominators and regard the prices as a multiset of subspaces. Whenever two members U, T
are incomparable, replace them by U ∩ T and U + T . The dimension formula preserves the total dimension.
Moreover,
                   dim(W ∩ U ) + dim(W ∩ T ) ≤ dim(W ∩ U ∩ T ) + dim(W ∩ (U + T ))
for every W : the intersection of W ∩ U and W ∩ T is W ∩ U ∩ T , and their sum is contained in W ∩ (U + T ).
Thus the replacement increases the sum of loads pointwise.
The process terminates. If d = dim(U ∩ T ), replacing incomparable U, T increases the sum of squared
dimensions by 2(dim U − d)(dim T − d) > 0. This integer potential is bounded by the fixed multiset size
times (dim V )2 . At termination all members are comparable. Dividing their multiplicities by the original
common denominator proves (10).


4.4    Simultaneous extension
We now show that the transition program (PS ) is feasible. The lemma is stated for arbitrary input laws
µe , one for each possible identity e of the last arrival; no common coupling between them is assumed. The
conclusion concerns the average of the updated laws over e, which is what a uniformly random last arrival
produces.
Lemma 4.6 (Averaged extension). Let S ⊆ E have size t ≥ 1, and let B ⊆ S be independent. For each
e ∈ S, let µe be a β-bounded law on independent subsets of S − e. If 0 ≤ a ≤ 1 − β, there are feasible addition
rules admitting mass a in each row e ∈ B and zero in every other row, such that the average of the updated
laws is (β + a/t)-bounded.


                                                        11
Proof. Let P consist of the transition arrays q = (qe (A)) satisfying 0 ≤ qe (A) ≤ µe (A), with zero mass for
infeasible additions and total mass a1{e ∈ B} in each row e; these are constraints (4a)–(4c) with µe in place
of µS−e . Availability (7) with a ≤ 1 − β shows that P is nonempty. It is a compact convex polytope. For
q ∈ P , write gU (q) for the expected load at U after choosing a row uniformly and making its prescribed
update, as in (5). Each gU is affine in q. We must find q ∈ P with gU (q) ≤ (β + a/t) dim U for every U .
The strategy is a minimax argument: we show that every nonnegative combination of the constraints
can be satisfied by some q ∈ P , and concludePby separation that a single q satisfies all of them. Fix
rational nonnegative prices λU , and write R = U λU dim U . Uncross them using Lemma 4.5 into a chain
C1 ⊆ · · · ⊆ Cm with coefficients γi . Apply Lemma 4.4 to this chain in every row e ∈ B and leave the
other rows unchanged. For each chain member Ci , the chain lemma bounds the updated load in row e by
β dim Ci + a1{ve ∈ Ci }, so averaging over the t rows and using the independence of B,
                                             a                           a
                         gCi (q) ≤ β dim Ci + |{e ∈ B : ve ∈ Ci }| ≤ β +      dim Ci ,
                                             t                             t
since an independent set has atP   most dim Ci vectors in Ci . Pointwise domination (10) and preservation of
the dimension budget now give U λU gU (q) ≤ (β + a/t)R. The choice of q depends on the prices, which is
enough for the next step.
The finite set of subspaces indexes an excess vector z(q) = (gU (q) − (β + a/t) dim U )U . If no q ∈ P satisfied
all the constraints, the compact convex set {z(q) : q ∈ P } would be disjoint from the closed negative orthant.
Strict separation would give a nonnegative real vector λ with minq∈P λ · z(q) > 0. The vector is nonnegative
because the orthant is unbounded in each negative coordinate direction. The excess vectors are bounded, so
a sufficiently close rational nonnegative vector would still give a strictly positive minimum, contradicting the
priced bound just proved. Hence one q satisfies every constraint.

The lemma does not assert that each updated row is bounded by the new parameter. It is the uniform
average that is controlled. This distinction allows the independence of the whole candidate set B to pay for
the increase, through |{e ∈ B : ve ∈ U }| ≤ dim U .

Proof of Proposition 4.2. We argue by induction on |S| = t ≥ s. For t = s, µS is the point mass at ∅, which
is a probability law and is 0-bounded, and βs = 0. Let t > s and assume the claim for all sets of size t − 1.
Then each µS−e is a βt−1 -bounded probability law on independent subsets of S − e. Apply Lemma 4.6 with
B = B(S), input laws µe = µS−e , parameter β = βt−1 , and a = at ; the hypothesis a ≤ 1 − β holds with
equality by (3). The addition rules it produces form a point of (PS ): constraints (4a)–(4c) are the definition
of P , and (4d) is the conclusion, since βt−1 + at /t = βt . Thus (PS ) is feasible. For any feasible q S , formula (6)
defines the average of the updated row laws, each of which is a probability law on independent subsets of S
by (4a) and (4b); so µS is a probability law, and (4d) says it is βt -bounded.


4.5    Analysis of the policy
We now verify that the coins of Algorithm 1 implement the recursively defined laws, and compute the selection
probabilities.
Lemma 4.7. Fix a weight vector w and a set S with |S| = t ≥ s. Conditional on the first t arrivals forming
S, the accepted set of Algorithm 1 after these arrivals has law µS , where µS is computed from the relative
weight order that w induces on S.

Proof. For t = s nothing has been accepted and µS is the point mass at ∅. Let t > s. Conditional on the
first t labels forming S, their last label e is uniform in S; conditional also on that label, the preceding t − 1
labels form S − e in a uniform order. By induction, the accepted set before this arrival has law µS−e . The
coin in Algorithm 1 accepts with probability qeS (A)/µS−e (A) from each state A of positive mass, which moves
exactly mass qeS (A) from A to A + e; constraint (4a) makes this a probability, and (4b) keeps the accepted
set independent. The updated law in row e is therefore the one in (6), and averaging over the uniform e gives
µS . Conditioning on the identity of the next label does not alter the previous internal coins, since they were
independent of the arrival order beyond the observed set.


                                                          12
Proof of Proposition 4.3. Let e ∈ B(E), the greedy basis of the whole ground set. By the second greedy
property of Section 2, e ∈ B(S) for every S ∋ e, so e is a candidate in every observed set containing it.
Condition on the observed set S with e arriving last at time P t > s. By Lemma 4.7, the accepted set before
this arrival has law µS−e , and the coin moves total mass A qeS (A) = at by (4c). Thus e is accepted with
conditional probability exactly at . The arrival position of e is uniform on {1, . . . , n} and independent of the
set of labels preceding it, so
                                           n            n             n−1
                                       1 X          1 X       s     sX1
                         Pr(e ∈ A) =           at =               =         = cn (s).
                                       n t=s+1      n t=s+1 t − 1   n     k
                                                                         k=s


Summing the weights of the elements of B(E) shows that Ew(A) ≥ cn (s) w(B(E)) = cn (s) OPT(w), which
is the fixed-cutoff claim of Theorem 1.2. As noted in the introduction, the same computation gives the
success probability of the classical cutoff rule; the algorithm reproduces it for every element of the optimum
simultaneously.


4.6    Choosing the cutoff
We finish with a finite-n bound, so the theorem does not rely on an asymptotic choice of s. For n = 2, the
cutoff s = 1 gives c2 (1) = 1/2. For n ≥ 3, put z = n/e, r = ⌊z⌋, and θ = z − r; both r and r + 1 are allowed
cutoffs. Using log u ≤ u − 1 first on (r + 1)/z and then on (k + 1)/k gives
                                                       n−1
                                   1  z   n  r+1−z   z X 1
                                     = log ≤       +
                                   e  n   z    n     n     k
                                                                   k=r+1

                                                 = (1 − θ)cn (r) + θcn (r + 1).

The last equality follows by separating the term 1/r in cn (r). At least one of these two cutoffs therefore
attains 1/e. This completes the proof of Theorem 1.2.


5     A tight single-sample prophet inequality
We now consider an arbitrary matroid and prove Theorem 1.3. As in Section 4, we present the algorithm
first (Section 5.1) and then its analysis (Sections 5.2 and 5.3). The algorithm maintains a stored vector W ,
initially equal to the sample vector, and keeps its accepted set inside B(W ). When an actual value arrives,
the algorithm may replace its coordinate in W . The replacement and acceptance rules are chosen together,
so that the stored vector retains the original product distribution and the accepted set is a fair thinning of
the greedy basis of W : each processed element of that basis is retained independently with probability 1/2.
The conclusion is stronger than Theorem 1.3. If Y is a fresh draw from the product value distribution, and T
independently retains each element of B(Y ) with probability 1/2, then our output satisfies
                                                        d
                                    {(e, Xe ) : e ∈ A} = {(e, Ye ) : e ∈ T }.                      (11)

Taking expected total value in (11) gives E e∈A Xe = 21 E e∈B(Y ) Ye = 12 E OPT(Y ) = 21 E OPT(X).
                                             P               P


5.1    Algorithm
We first recall how a greedy basis changes when one coordinate changes. We include zero-weight elements in
greedy throughout this section, so every greedy set is a full basis.

Lemma 5.1. Fix all coordinates other than e, and let B0 , B1 be the greedy bases when the value of e is
respectively ve− ≤ ve+ . If e belongs to both bases or to neither, then B0 = B1 . Otherwise, e ∈
                                                                                               / B0 , e ∈ B1 , and
B1 = B0 − f + e for one element f .


                                                       13
Proof. Greedy accepts a label exactly when it is not in the closure of the labels scanned before it. Raising
the value of e from ve− to ve+ moves e earlier in the scan: its set of predecessors shrinks, while the set of
predecessors of every other label either gains e or is unchanged. By the closure criterion, e can only enter the
basis, and every other label can only leave it. Both bases have size r(E). Hence if e enters, exactly one other
label f leaves, and if e does not enter, nothing changes.

Let P be the set of processed labels and A the accepted set. When e arrives with actual value x = Xe ,
compare the current basis C = B(W ) with the basis D obtained by replacing We with x. A refresh of
coordinate e means making this replacement in the stored vector, that is, setting We = x. If e ∈ D \ C,
Lemma 5.1 gives D = C − f + e for a unique label f . The algorithm refreshes with probability
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                        1/2, e ∈ C,
                                       0,    e∈/ C ∪ D,
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                   p = 0,     e ∈ D \ C, f ∈ A,                                    (12)
                                       
                                         1,   e ∈ D \ C, f ∈ P \ A,
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       1/2, e ∈ D \ C, f ∈  / P,

using a fresh independent fair coin whenever p = 1/2. On a refresh it sets We = x and accepts e if and only
if e ∈ D; without a refresh it keeps W and rejects e. Then e is added to P . Algorithm 2 states the same rule
as pseudocode.
The approach of repeatedly recomputing the current optimum and implementing its recommendation only
when compatible with previous commitments is reminiscent of the random-order matching framework of
Kesselheim et al. [KRTV13]. The intuition behind the cases is as follows. If e is already in the basis on the
strength of its sample, a fair coin decides whether to replace the sample by the actual value, and e is accepted
when it survives the replacement. If e newly enters and displaces f , an accepted f blocks the exchange, and
an already rejected f permits it with probability one. If f has not arrived, a fresh fair coin is used.

  Algorithm 2: Single-sample matroid prophet algorithm
 1 Initialize W ← S, A ← ∅, P ← ∅, and C ← B(W )
 2 for each arriving label e with actual value x = Xe do
 3     Let W ′ equal W with coordinate e replaced by x, and compute D ← B(W ′ )
 4     if e ∈ C then
 5         With probability 1/2, set W ← W ′ and C ← D, and add e to A if e ∈ D
 6     else if e ∈ D then
 7         Let f be the unique element of C \ D
 8         Set p ← 0 if f ∈ A, p ← 1 if f ∈ P \ A, and p ← 1/2 if f ∈
                                                                    /P
 9         With probability p, set W ← W ′ , C ← D, and A ← A + e
10     Set P ← P + e
11 return A



The rule in rank one. To see the rule in the simplest case, let M have rank one with no loops, so that B(W )
is the single element holding the largest stored value, with ties broken by priority. Initially the stored values
are the samples and C = {c}, where c holds the largest sample. When e arrives, there are two ways for it to
matter. If e = c, so that its own sample is the current maximum, a fair coin decides whether to overwrite that
sample by the actual value Xe ; on a refresh, e is accepted if it still holds the maximum. If e ̸= c and replacing
its stored value by Xe makes it the maximum, accepting e would displace c: if c was accepted earlier, e is
rejected; if c arrived earlier and was rejected, e is accepted; and if c has not yet arrived, e is accepted with
probability 1/2. The rule is randomized even in rank one, and it differs from the maximum-sample threshold
rule of Rubinstein, Wang, and Weinberg [RWW20], which accepts the first value above the threshold (with
independent random tie-breakers when distributions have atoms). The coins are what make the output an
exact fair thinning of a fresh optimum, and tracking the displaced element is what allows the same rule to
work in every matroid.


                                                       14
Lemma 5.2. After every arrival processed by Algorithm 2, the accepted set and stored vector satisfy A ⊆ B(W )
and We = Xe for all e ∈ A.

Proof. The arriving label has not previously been accepted. If e ∈ C, a refresh removes no other old
basis member, by Lemma 5.1; if e enters D from outside C, the rule (12) forbids displacing an accepted f .
Acceptance always refreshes the accepted coordinate to its actual value, and no coordinate changes after its
own arrival. Induction proves both claims; in particular the output is independent on every realization.


5.2    The conditional thinning invariant
The sample and the actual value of a label are two independent draws from the same distribution. Their joint
law can be generated by first drawing the unordered pair, then using an independent fair bit to assign its two
endpoints to the sample and actual value. These orientation bits are independent across labels, including
when equal endpoints are distinguished only for the analysis. Moreover, the stored coordinate We is always
one of the two draws, so the algorithm’s state on coordinate e is captured by a single bit recording which
draw is stored.
Fix ve− ≤ ve+ , and independently assign one endpoint as the sample and the other as the actual value by a fair
bit. Keep the arrival order fixed independently of these assignments. The algorithm sees the sample endpoints
at the start and the actual endpoint of each label at its arrival, but does not see the pairs in advance.
Introduce a latent bit Ze recording the endpoint currently stored in We : bit zero denotes ve− and bit one
denotes ve+ . Initially these bits are independent and fair. A refresh flips the current bit, even if its endpoints
are numerically equal. Before e arrives, its actual endpoint is opposite its stored endpoint. These bits are
only proof variables; the algorithm does not use them.
For z ∈ {0, 1}E , let W (z) be the vector with W (z)e = ve− if ze = 0 and W (z)e = ve+ if ze = 1. Thus B(W (Z))
is the greedy basis of the current stored vector, with the fixed tie priority.
Lemma 5.3. After every fixed arrival prefix P , the vector Z is uniform on {0, 1}E . Conditional on the
entire vector Z, the accepted set is an independent fair thinning of B(W (Z)) ∩ P .

Proof. Initially P = ∅, so the claim holds. Suppose it holds before e arrives. Fix (Zg )g̸=e , and let Bi be the
resulting basis B(W (Z)) when Ze = i, for i ∈ {0, 1}. By the induction hypothesis, Pr(Ze = i | (Zg )g̸=e ) = 1/2.
Write Ig = 1{g∈A} for each g ∈ P . Conditional on Ze = i, the variables (Ig )g∈Bi ∩P are independent, and
each equals one with probability 1/2. Let H = B0 ∩ B1 ∩ P . The distribution of (Ig )g∈H is the same for i = 0
and i = 1; when an exchanged element f ∈ P exists, these variables are also independent of If conditional
on each value of Ze . Thus we can fix (Ig )g∈H without changing the probabilities for Ze or If used below.
The update does not change any Ig with g ∈ H. We now compute the joint probabilities of Ze and Ie after
processing e, together with If when f ∈ P .
If neither basis contains e, the bases coincide and nothing changes. If both contain e, they again coincide.
For each value of Ze before processing e, a fair coin either refreshes the coordinate, flipping Ze and accepting
e, or leaves Ze unchanged and rejects e. After processing e, for each z ∈ {0, 1}, the joint probabilities
Pr(Ze = z, Ie = 1) and Pr(Ze = z, Ie = 0) are each 1/4. Thus Pr(Ie = 1 | Ze = z) = 1/2.
In the remaining case write B1 = B0 − f + e. If f ∈  / P , either orientation flips with probability 1/2, and only
a flip from zero to one accepts. The output-zero mass is 1/2, with e outside the basis; the output-one masses
with e accepted and unaccepted are each 1/4. There is no processed indicator for f to preserve.
Suppose instead that f ∈ P . There are three input states after the common indicators have been suppressed.
The zero-bit state with f accepted has mass 1/4 and stays unchanged. The zero-bit state with f unaccepted
has mass 1/4 and surely flips, accepting e. The one-bit state has mass 1/2; its fair refresh coin sends half this
mass to bit zero with f unaccepted, and leaves half at bit one with e unaccepted. Thus the joint output
masses are

                      Stored bit and processed basis member        Accepted    Unaccepted
                      Ze = 0, member f                                1/4           1/4
                      Ze = 1, member e                                1/4           1/4


                                                        15
Each output bit is fair, and its processed basis member has an independent fair accepted indicator. Multiplying
by the unchanged product law of the common indicators proves the conditional thinning claim. For every
configuration of the other bits, the output bit is fair, so the entire vector remains uniform. This completes
the induction.


5.3      Distributional guarantee and optimality
Proof of Theorem 1.3. For fixed endpoint pairs, Lemma 5.3 says that at termination W has the product law
of fair endpoint choices. Conditional on W , A is an independent fair thinning of B(W ). By Lemma 5.2, each
selected stored value is its actual value. This proves the fixed-pair version of (11), with Y a fresh independent
fair choice of endpoints.
For general distributions, draw two independent values per label and condition on their unordered pairs.
Independent fair orientations recover the law of the sample and actual vectors, including when the two values
coincide. Averaging the fixed-pair result over the pairs proves (11).
Finally, nonnegativity and greedy optimality give
                                     X              X            1   X     1
                                 E         Xe = E         Ye =     E   Ye = E OPT(X),
                                                                 2         2
                                     e∈A            e∈T            e∈B(Y )

with no integrability assumption.
All data used at a step are the initially given samples and values already revealed. The algorithm caches the
current basis and computes one replacement basis per arrival, for a total of at most n + 1 greedy scans. Each
scan uses at most n independence queries. Thus the algorithm is online and uses O(n2 ) independence queries,
proving the algorithmic part of Theorem 1.3.
The tightness is well-known and we provide only for completeness. Consider a rank-one matroid with two
elements arriving in the order 1, 2. Let X1 = 1, and let X2 be H with probability 1/H and zero otherwise.
Even an algorithm knowing these distributions has expected reward at most one: accepting the first value
gives one, and rejecting leaves an independent future reward of mean one. Extra independent samples cannot
change this comparison. The prophet obtains 2 − 1/H in expectation, so no uniform factor greater than 1/2
is possible as H → ∞.


6      Secretary guarantees from samples
In this section, we describe a reduction from the matroid secretary problem to the single-sample matroid
prophet that preserves constant-competitiveness. The existence of this reduction is originally credited to
Wenzheng Li by Fu et al. [FLT+ 24], who cite private communication.4 As we do not have access to this private
communication, we, for completeness, give a self-contained quantitative version, which yields Corollary 1.4
when applied to our single-sample algorithm.
Theorem 6.1 (Reduction to secretary). Let 0 < α ≤ 1. An α-competitive single-sample prophet algorithm
for arbitrary matroids yields an α2 /16-competitive secretary algorithm for arbitrary matroids. It suffices for
the prophet algorithm to handle a uniformly random arrival order, independent of the samples and values,
without knowing the permutation in advance. The reduction preserves polynomial running time.

Overview. The natural idea is to reject a prefix of the arrivals, use their weights as the prophet samples, and
then run the prophet algorithm on the remaining arrivals. The difficulty is that the prophet algorithm may
later decide to select one of the already rejected prefix elements, which cannot be implemented. The reduction
handles this in three steps. Section 6.1 rejects a preliminary half-sample and filters the remaining elements so
that the expected total weight of all candidates is at most the original optimum, while the expected optimum
of the candidates is at least half the original optimum. Section 6.2 presents each candidate to the prophet
algorithm as a random variable that is nonzero only with a small activation probability q, independently as
    4 The second author thanks Neel Patel for informing him of the existence of this reduction.




                                                                  16
a sample and as a value; the useful prophet reward is then linear in q, while an unimplementable selection
requires both activations and costs only q 2 . This is where the filter is needed: without it the quadratic loss
would be charged against the total weight rather than the optimum. Section 6.3 shows how to realize this
simulation exactly online, by interleaving the stored prefix with the physical arrivals so that the simulated
arrival order is independent of the activations. Optimizing q yields the ratio α2 /16.


6.1    A preliminary sample
Fix the secretary weights w. Reject a prefix of length K0 ∼ Bin(n, 1/2), independently of the arrival
permutation. Its set S is an independent half-sample of E. An element e ∈    / S is eligible if e ∈
                                                                                                  / clM (S≻e ),
where S≻e consists of sample elements preceding e in weight and tie-priority order. Let T be the eligible set.
Eligibility is known when e arrives, since every sample weight has already been observed.
Lemma 6.2. The eligible set satisfies E[w(T )] = E[w(B(S))] ≤ OPT(w) and E[OPT(w|T )] ≥ OPT(w)/2.

Proof. The event e ∈ / clM (S≻e ) is independent of whether e belongs to S. The two possibilities put e in B(S)
and in T , respectively, with equal probability. Summing their weights gives the equality, and every B(S) is
independent, giving the upper bound. For the other inequality, let I = B(E). Each e ∈ I is not spanned even
by all of its predecessors in the greedy order, so I \ S is an independent subset of T . Its expected weight is
OPT(w)/2.


6.2    Rare activations and the loss bound
Conditional on S, let E ′ = E \ S and define fixed values ve = we 1{e ∈ T } for e ∈ E ′ . The restriction M |E ′
is known, and each ve can be computed when we is revealed. For a parameter q ∈ (0, 1), we simulate the
prophet algorithm on this restriction with independent distributions De = (1 − q)δ0 + qδve . Write Xe , Ye for
mutually independent Bernoulli-q activation bits: the sample is Xe ve , and the actual value is Ye ve .
The simulation below observes every label with Xe = 1 in a second rejected prefix. It supplies all prophet
samples before simulating any actual arrivals, and processes the latter in a uniform simulated arrival order
independent of all activation bits. When the prophet algorithm selects a positive-value element with Xe = 0,
that label is physically arriving and we accept it immediately. Selections with Xe = 1 cannot be implemented
physically and are discarded. All selections remain in the internal state of the prophet algorithm, so the real
output is a subset of an independent set.
On every realization, the discarded value is at most e Xe Ye ve . Thus, conditional on S, the prophet guarantee
                                                     P
gives

                        E[secretary reward | S] ≥ αE[OPT((Ye ve )e∈E ′ ) | S] − q 2 w(T )
                                                 ≥ αq OPT(w|T ) − q 2 w(T ).                                (13)

The second line follows by retaining the activated members of an optimum of T . Taking expectations and
applying Lemma 6.2 yields E[reward] ≥ (αq/2 − q 2 ) OPT(w). Choosing q = α/4 gives α2 OPT(w)/16, as
claimed.
We note that without the preliminary sample, the same calculation would charge q 2 e we , which can be
                                                                                     P
arbitrarily larger than OPT(w). The bound on E[w(T )] is needed for the analysis to go through.


6.3    Exact online simulation
We supply the implementation and its distributional justification. Conditional on S, let N = |E ′ |; the residual
physical permutation π is uniform. Draw a word b ∈ {0, 1}N of independent Bernoulli-q bits, independently
of π, and let K be its number of ones. Reject the next K physical arrivals, denoting their set by R, and store
their weights. Set Xe = 1{e ∈ R}. Initialize the prophet algorithm with sample ve on R and zero elsewhere,
using fresh independent internal randomness. Computing ve for e ∈ R uses only S and this observed weight.



                                                       17
Draw the actual bits Ye independently. Scan the word b from left to right. At a one, take the next stored label
of R in its observed order and simulate its actual arrival with value Ye ve . At a zero, read the next physical
arrival, compute its eligibility and ve , and immediately supply Ye ve to the prophet algorithm. Implement
its positive-value acceptance in the physical process. The internal state records every simulated acceptance,
including discarded ones and zero-value selections. Empty streams when K = 0, K = N , or N = 0 require no
special changes.
Let Σ be the simulated arrival permutation. For a fixed subset D ⊆ E ′ and permutation σ of E ′ , exactly one
physical permutation and one word b produce (R, Σ) = (D, σ): the physical permutation is σ|D followed by
σ|E ′ \D , and the word marks the positions of D in σ. Consequently,

                                                           q |D| (1 − q)N −|D|
                                 Pr(R = D, Σ = σ | S) =                        .                          (14)
                                                                    N!
Thus R is an independent Bernoulli-q sample and Σ is uniform independently of R. The bits Y are independent
of both. The simulated sample and actual vectors are therefore independent product draws from the same
distributions, in an independent random order, exactly as required by the prophet guarantee. In particular,
the simulation allows Xe = Ye = 1; this is the overlap charged in (13).
After the preliminary sample, we test each arriving label’s eligibility with one independence query against the
prefix of B(S) preceding it in weight order, and make the accept/reject decision immediately. The prophet
algorithm runs on M |E ′ , and all remaining bookkeeping is polynomial. Thus the reduction is online and
preserves polynomial running time.
For Algorithm 2, the resulting secretary algorithm is ordinal. First suppose all secretary weights are positive
and distinct. Every simulated coordinate is either zero or an already observed secretary weight, so the
observed order determines every comparison used by the prophet algorithm. Eligibility also uses only that
order. The resulting algorithm therefore has the same behavior for every positive weight vector with a given
strict order. Taking limits of such vectors extends its 1/64 guarantee to nonnegative weights, including ties
resolved by the fixed label priority. The algorithm treats every eligible real weight as above the artificial
zeros; it need not identify genuine zero weights. Thus Theorem 6.1 gives an ordinal 1/64 guarantee when
instantiated with Algorithm 2.
A constant number of samples. The same argument applies if the prophet algorithm uses k ≥ 1 independent
samples per distribution. Set p = 1 − (1 − q)k , and use a Bernoulli-p word to generate the second rejected
prefix R and the interleaving. Conditional on R, draw the k sample flags independently across labels: on R,
use the Bernoulli-q product law conditioned on at least one being one; outside R, set all flags to zero. Their
unconditional law is the required product law, independent of the simulated arrival order. The expected
discarded value is at most q[1 − (1 − q)k ]E[w(T )] ≤ kq 2 OPT(w). Choosing q = α/(4k) gives ratio α2 /(16k).
This extension uses only the stated expected prophet guarantee, not any conditional guarantee after fixing
endpoint pairs.


Acknowledgments and research process
Several of the results in this paper date from April 2026. We first investigated the strong matroid secretary
conjecture by computing optimal ordinal policies for small matroids with the linear program of Section 3;
the computed ratios always exceeded 1/e. We also tested several stronger conjectures on these instances,
among them the truncation conjecture of Section 3, which we could prove for uniform matroids and later
refuted using our earlier high-girth hardness result for graphic matroids. Our search for problems equivalent
to the strong conjecture led to the single-sample prophet inequality of Section 5; the constant-to-constant
implication for secretary was known through personal communication, but as we did not have access to that
argument, Section 6 gives an explicit quantitative reduction.
Recent interactions with GPT Sol 5.6 and especially GPT Astra were essential in obtaining the results above,
in particular the linear-matroid construction of Section 4 and the tight single-sample prophet inequality of
Section 5. Proofs produced in these interactions were then leanified by GPT Astra and checked independently
by the authors.


                                                      18
References
[AKW14] Pablo D. Azar, Robert Kleinberg, and S. Matthew Weinberg. Prophet inequalities with limited
        information. In Proceedings of SODA, pages 1358–1377, 2014. doi:10.1137/1.9781611973402.
        100.
[AL21]     Susanne Albers and Leon Ladewig. New results for the k-secretary problem. Theoretical Computer
           Science, 863:102–119, 2021. doi:10.1016/j.tcs.2021.02.022.
[BHK+ 25] Kiarash Banihashem, MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi, Dariusz R. Kowalski, Piotr Krysta, Danny
          Mittal, and Jan Olkowski. Beating competitive ratio 4 for graphic matroid secretary. In Proceedings
          of ESA, volume 351 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics, pages 52:1–52:16, 2025.
          doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ESA.2025.52.
[BIK07]    Moshe Babaioff, Nicole Immorlica, and Robert Kleinberg. Matroids, secretary problems, and online
           mechanisms. In Proceedings of SODA, pages 434–443, 2007. URL: https://www.cs.cornell.
           edu/~rdk/papers/matsec.pdf.
[BIKK07] Moshe Babaioff, Nicole Immorlica, David Kempe, and Robert Kleinberg. A knapsack secretary
         problem with applications. In Proceedings of APPROX/RANDOM, Lecture Notes in Computer
         Science, pages 16–28, 2007. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-74208-1_2.
[BIKK18] Moshe Babaioff, Nicole Immorlica, David Kempe, and Robert Kleinberg. Matroid secretary
         problems. Journal of the ACM, 65(6):35:1–35:26, 2018. doi:10.1145/3212512.
[BJS14]    Niv Buchbinder, Kamal Jain, and Mohit Singh. Secretary problems via linear programming.
           Mathematics of Operations Research, 39(1):190–206, 2014. doi:10.1287/moor.2013.0604.
[CCJ15]    T-H. Hubert Chan, Fei Chen, and Shaofeng H.-C. Jiang. Revealing optimal thresholds for
           generalized secretary problem via continuous LP: Impacts on online K-item auction and bipartite
           K-matching with random arrival order. In Proceedings of SODA, pages 1169–1188, 2015. doi:
           10.1137/1.9781611973730.78.
[Fer89]    Thomas S. Ferguson. Who solved the secretary problem? Statistical Science, 4(3):282–289, 1989.
           doi:10.1214/ss/1177012493.
[Fin11]    Liri Finkelstein. Two algorithms for the matroid secretary problem. Master’s thesis, Technion –
           Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, 2011.
[FLT+ 24] Hu Fu, Pinyan Lu, Zhihao Gavin Tang, Hongxun Wu, Jinzhao Wu, and Qianfan Zhang. Sample-
          based matroid prophet inequalities. In Proceedings of EC, page 781, 2024. URL: https://arxiv.
          org/abs/2406.12799, doi:10.1145/3670865.3673506.
[FO17]     Tara Fife and James Oxley. Laminar matroids. European Journal of Combinatorics, 62:206–216,
           2017. doi:10.1016/j.ejc.2017.01.002.
[FSZ15]    Moran Feldman, Ola Svensson, and Rico Zenklusen. A simple O(log log(rank))-competitive
           algorithm for the matroid secretary problem. In Proceedings of SODA, pages 1189–1201, 2015.
           doi:10.1137/1.9781611973730.79.
[FSZ26]    Moran Feldman, Ola Svensson, and Rico Zenklusen. Nearly tight sample complexity for matroid
           online contention resolution. In Proceedings of SODA, pages 4692–4711, 2026. doi:10.1137/1.
           9781611978971.171.
[IP73]     A. W. Ingleton and M. J. Piff. Gammoids and transversal matroids. Journal of Combinatorial
           Theory, Series B, 15(1):51–68, 1973. doi:10.1016/0095-8956(73)90031-2.
[Kle05]    Robert Kleinberg. A multiple-choice secretary algorithm with applications to online auctions. In
           Proceedings of SODA, pages 630–631, 2005. URL: https://www.cs.cornell.edu/~rdk/papers/
           MultSec.pdf.


                                                     19
[KRTV13] Thomas Kesselheim, Klaus Radke, Andreas Tönnis, and Berthold Vöcking. An optimal
         online algorithm for weighted bipartite matching and extensions to combinatorial auctions.
         In Proceedings of ESA, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 589–600, 2013. doi:
         10.1007/978-3-642-40450-4_50.
[KW12]      Robert Kleinberg and S. Matthew Weinberg. Matroid prophet inequalities. In Proceedings of
            STOC, pages 123–136, 2012. doi:10.1145/2213977.2213991.
[Lac14]     Oded Lachish. O(log log rank) competitive ratio for the matroid secretary problem. In Proceedings
            of FOCS, pages 326–335, 2014. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2014.42.
[Lin73]     Bernt Lindström. On the vector representations of induced matroids. Bulletin of the London
            Mathematical Society, 5(1):85–90, 1973. doi:10.1112/blms/5.1.85.
[MR08]      Dillon Mayhew and Gordon F. Royle. Matroids with nine elements. Journal of Combinatorial
            Theory, Series B, 98(2):415–431, 2008. doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2007.07.005.
[Nel18]     Peter Nelson. Almost all matroids are nonrepresentable. Bulletin of the London Mathematical
            Society, 50(2):245–248, 2018. doi:10.1112/blms.12141.
[Rad57]     Richard Rado. Note on independence functions. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society,
            s3-7(1):300–320, 1957. doi:10.1112/plms/s3-7.1.300.
[RWW20] Aviad Rubinstein, Jack Z. Wang, and S. Matthew Weinberg. Optimal single-choice prophet
        inequalities from samples. In Proceedings of ITCS, volume 151 of Leibniz International Proceedings
        in Informatics, pages 60:1–60:10, 2020. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2020.60.
[Sin26]     Sahil Singla. The matroid secretary conjecture is true. arXiv:2609.14555, 2026. Posted September
            13, 2026. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2609.14555.
[STV21]     José A. Soto, Abner Turkieltaub, and Victor Verdugo. Strong algorithms for the ordinal matroid
            secretary problem. Mathematics of Operations Research, 46(2):642–673, 2021. doi:10.1287/
            moor.2020.1083.


A     An exact linear program for ordinal matroid secretary
Recall from Section 3 that ρ(M ) denotes the optimal ordinal secretary ratio of a matroid M of positive rank.
We now give the full linear program and prove that its optimum is ρ(M ), including the attainment and
policy-extraction statements in Theorem A.2. The computational motivation and comparison with earlier LP
formulations are in Section 3.
We present the uncompressed program first, with a direct probabilistic meaning for every variable. After
proving correctness, we distinguish the weighted and per-element objectives and describe symmetry and state
reductions that preserve the optimum.


A.1       States and variables
Throughout, M = (E, I) has n elements and rank function r. Since policies are ordinal, only the relative
order of the weights matters, and with the fixed tie-breaking priority of Section 2 we may regard the weight
vector as a strict total order on E; we call this the weight order. The elements arrive in a uniformly random
order, which is independent of the weight order.
An ordered subset σ is a list of distinct labels. We write Sσ for its underlying set and |σ| = |Sσ | for its length.
For a weight order π on E and a subset S ⊆ E, π|S denotes the ordered subset listing S in decreasing weight
order. For e ∈ Sσ , σ − e denotes the list obtained by deleting e; thus (π|S ) − e = π|S−e .
The observation available to an ordinal policy after t arrivals is the observed set S together with the relative
weight order on S, that is, the ordered subset π|S , together with the order in which those elements arrived.
The following observation is the basis of the program.


                                                        20
Lemma A.1. Fix an ordinal policy, a weight order π, and a t-subset S. The probability that the first t
arrivals form S and that the accepted set after these arrivals equals A depends on π only through π|S .
                                                        −1
Proof. The first t arrivals form S with probability nt      , and conditional on this event the arrival order
within S is uniform on the t! orders of S. The policy’s decisions during these arrivals are determined by the
arrival order within S, the relative weight order on the observed elements, and the policy’s internal coins.
The relative weight order on any subset of S is determined by π|S . Averaging over the arrival order and the
coins therefore yields a quantity depending on π only through π|S .

We introduce one variable for each state and one for each transition.
   • For every ordered subset σ, including the empty list, and every independent A ⊆ Sσ , a variable pσ,A .
     Its intended value is the probability, under any weight order π with π|Sσ = σ, that the first |σ| arrivals
     form Sσ and the accepted set after them is A. By Lemma A.1 this is well defined. Note that pσ,A
                                n −1
     includes the probability |σ|     of the observed set; it is not a conditional probability.
                                  

   • For every nonempty σ, every e ∈ Sσ , and every independent A ⊆ Sσ − e, variables yσ,e,A and zσ,e,A .
     Their intended values are the probabilities, under any weight order restricting to σ, that the first |σ| − 1
     arrivals form Sσ − e with accepted set A, that e arrives next, and that e is accepted (for y) or rejected
     (for z).
Different orderings of the same set S describe different weight orders, and their variables are not combined:
for each fixed π, only the variables with σ = π|S for some S are relevant. States with a dependent accepted
set are unreachable and are omitted.
For example, take U2,3 on labels a, b, c, and suppose a is heavier than b. The state σ = (a, b), A = {a} can be
reached in two ways: a arrived first and was accepted, then b was rejected; or b arrived first and was rejected,
then a was accepted. Accordingly, p(a,b),{a} = z(a,b),b,{a} + y(a,b),a,∅ . The total mass entering through the
first of these histories, before the decision on b, is y(a,b),b,{a} + z(a,b),b,{a} = p(a),{a} /2, since b is one of the
two labels remaining after a. These identities hold regardless of where c lies in the weight order.


A.2     The program
For a weight order π and an element e, define the abbreviation
                                               X      X
                                     xπe =                  yπ|S ,e,A ,                                           (15)
                                                S⊆E: e∈S A⊆S−e
                                                          A∈I

a linear function of the variables. Its intended value is the probability that e is accepted under weight order π:
the summands correspond to the disjoint possibilities for the observed set at the arrival of e and the accepted
set at that moment. A prefix of π is a set consisting of the j heaviest elements under π, for some 0 ≤ j ≤ n.
The program is

    maximize       c    subject to
    p∅,∅ = 1,                                                                                                    (16a)
                          pσ−e,A
    yσ,e,A + zσ,e,A =                        for all nonempty σ, e ∈ Sσ , and independent A ⊆ Sσ − e,            (16b)
                       n − |σ| + 1
    yσ,e,A = 0                               whenever A + e is dependent,                                        (16c)
              X              X
    pσ,A =          zσ,e,A +     yσ,e,A−e    for all nonempty σ and independent A ⊆ Sσ ,                         (16d)
              e∈Sσ \A          e∈A
      X
            xπe ≥ c r(H)                     for every weight order π and every prefix H of π,                   (16e)
      e∈H
    p, y, z ≥ 0.



                                                          21
Constraint (16b) says that after reaching the state (σ − e, A), the label e arrives next with probability
1/(n − |σ| + 1), since n − |σ| + 1 labels remain unobserved and the next arrival is uniform among them;
the arriving label is then either accepted or rejected. Constraint (16c) forbids dependent acceptances.
Constraint (16d) partitions the ways of reaching the state (σ, A) according to the last arrival e and whether it
was rejected (so the accepted set was already A) or accepted (so the accepted set was A − e). Constraint (16e)
is the prefix form of c-competitiveness, which by (1) is equivalent to the weighted form for ordinal policies.
A consequence of the flow constraints is the mass identity
                                                  −1
                              X                  n
                                   pσ,A =                for every ordered subset σ,                          (17)
                                                |σ|
                               A

which is the P
             probability
                    P that the first |σ| arrivals form Sσ . Indeed, summing (16d) over A regroups the
right side as e∈Sσ A′ (yσ,e,A′ + zσ,e,A′ ), with A′ ranging over independent subsets of Sσ − e; by (16b) and
                                    n −1
                                                          −1
induction on |σ| = t this equals t t−1   /(n − t + 1) = nt    .
                                      


A.3     Correctness
Theorem A.2. Let M be a matroid with at least one nonloop. The linear program (16) has an optimal
solution, and its optimal value is ρ(M ). Moreover, every feasible solution with objective value c yields a
c-competitive ordinal policy whose decisions depend only on the current observed weight order, the arriving
label, and the current accepted set. In particular, the supremum defining ρ(M ) is attained by such a policy.

Proof. We show that every c-competitive ordinal policy yields a feasible solution with objective value c, and
that every feasible solution with objective value c yields a c-competitive ordinal policy. Together these give
that the value of the program is ρ(M ), once we know that the maximum is attained.
From policies to solutions. Fix an ordinal policy that is c-competitive. It may be randomized and may
remember the entire arrival history, not only the current weight order and accepted set. Define pσ,A , yσ,e,A ,
and zσ,e,A as the probabilities described in Section A.1. By Lemma A.1, applied to Sσ and to Sσ − e, these are
well defined: the transition probabilities are determined by the same averaging, since the event that e arrives
at position |σ| and the subsequent decision are functions of the arrival order within Sσ , the relative weight
order on Sσ , and the coins. The variables are nonnegative, and (16a) holds because nothing has been observed
or accepted initially. Conditional on any history through the first |σ| − 1 arrivals, the next label is uniform
among the n − |σ| + 1 unobserved labels, which gives (16b); the policy never accepts a dependent addition,
which gives (16c); and partitioning the event of reaching (σ, A) according to the last arrival gives (16d).
Under a weight order π, the probability that e is accepted is the sum of the probabilities of the disjoint events
indexed by the observed set at its arrival and the accepted set at that moment,  P which is xe in (15). Finally,
                                                                                                π

c-competitiveness of an ordinal policy is equivalent to the prefix inequalities e∈H Pr(e ∈ A) ≥ c r(H) for all
weight orders and prefixes, by (1) and the limiting argument following it. This is (16e).
From solutions to policies. Fix a feasible solution with objective value c. Define a policy as follows. When a
label e arrives, let σ be the observed weight order including e, and let A be the set accepted before this arrival.
Accept e with probability yσ,e,A /(yσ,e,A + zσ,e,A ), interpreted as zero when the denominator is zero. This uses
only the current weight order and the accepted set together with the arriving label, and it is ordinal. By (16c),
e is accepted with positive probability only if A + e is independent, so the output is always independent.
We claim that under this policy, for every weight order π and every S ⊆ E, the probability of reaching
the state (π|S , A) is pπ|S ,A , and the probabilities of the accepting and rejecting transitions into states with
observed set S are the corresponding y and z variables. We argue by induction on |S|. For S = ∅ this is (16a).
Let |S| = t ≥ 1, put σ = π|S , and fix e ∈ S and independent A ⊆ S − e. By induction, the probability of
reaching (σ − e, A) is pσ−e,A . Conditional on this event, e is the next arrival with probability 1/(n − t + 1),
so the probability of reaching (σ − e, A) and then seeing e arrive is yσ,e,A + zσ,e,A by (16b). Multiplying by
the acceptance probability shows that the accepting and rejecting transitions have probabilities exactly yσ,e,A
and zσ,e,A ; when both variables vanish, so do both probabilities. Summing the transitions into (σ, A) over
the last arrival gives (16d), so the probability of reaching (σ, A) is pσ,A . This proves the claim.


                                                         22
By the claim, xπe is the probability that e is accepted under π, so (16e) states that e∈H Pr(e ∈ A) ≥ c r(H)
                                                                                     P
for every prefix H of every weight order. By (1), the policy is c-competitive.
Attainment. The always-rejecting policy yields a feasible solution with c = 0, so the program is feasible. If e
is a nonloop and π places e first, the prefix H = {e} has r(H) = 1, and the claim above shows that xπe is a
probability; hence c ≤ 1 for every feasible solution. A feasible linear program with bounded objective attains
its optimum. The optimal solution yields an optimal ordinal policy of the stated form.


A.4     Two objectives
Program (16) optimizes the full weighted competitive ratio. Our linear-matroid construction in Section 4
satisfies a stronger, probability-competitive requirement: every element of the greedy basis is selected with
probability at least c. This requirement also has a linear programming formulation, obtained by replacing (16e)
with the constraints xπe ≥ c for every weight order π and every element e of its greedy basis, namely every
e whose addition increases the rank of the prefix of π ending at e. Every feasible solution of the stronger
program is feasible for (16), but the two optima can differ.
For example, on the uniform matroid U2,3 the full and per-element optima are 3/4 and 2/3, respectively. To
see this, symmetrize over labels, and assume without loss that the policy accepts all remaining elements
whenever capacity permits doing so. Conditional on accepting the first arrival, let u, v be its time-two
acceptance probabilities for a record and a nonrecord. Enumerating the six weight orders gives best-to-worst
marginals ((4 + u − v)/6, 2/3, (4 − u + v)/6). Conditional on rejecting the first arrival, all three marginals are
2/3. Thus the expected number of top-two selections is at most 3/2, attained at u = 1, v = 0 after accepting
the first arrival; that policy satisfies all prefix constraints with ratio 3/4. The second-best marginal is always
2/3, so the per-element optimum is 2/3, attained by selecting two fixed arrival positions.


A.5     Symmetry and state reductions
The uncompressed program has a variable for every ordered subset and independent accepted set, and the
number of ordered subsets alone exceeds n!. Three reductions make the program tractable for larger instances
without changing its value; they are what we used in our computations.
First, only rank-increasing prefixes need constraints in (16e): if a prefix H + e has the same rank as H, then
nonnegativity of xπe shows that the inequality for H implies the inequality for H + e.
Second, averaging any policy over the automorphisms of M preserves its worst-case guarantee, since an
automorphism maps weight orders to weight orders and preserves ranks of prefixes. Hence there is an optimal
policy that is invariant under automorphisms, and ordered subsets and weight orders may be reduced to
automorphism representatives, transporting labels and accepted sets by the same permutation.
Third, for a fixed observed set S, accepted sets A, A′ can be merged when A ∪ J and A′ ∪ J are either both
independent or both dependent for every J ⊆ E \ S. Equivalently, the labeled minors (M/A)|(E \ S) and
(M/A′ )|(E \ S) coincide, so the two states admit exactly the same future decisions. For example, after two
arrivals in U2,3 , the empty accepted set and an accepted singleton both leave a free singleton on the last label.
This equivalence is preserved after either accepting or rejecting the next label: rejection deletes that label
from the remaining minor, and acceptance contracts it. Past selections are already recorded in the acceptance
flows, so averaging the next decision over histories within a merged state preserves the aggregate future flows
and the objective. The conditional averaging depends only on the observed order and the merged state, so it
is common to every weight order extending that observation.
These reductions decrease the program size without changing its value. They do not produce a polynomial-size
formulation, nor does the existence of the program itself supply a uniform competitive bound over all matroids;
it is a tool for computing and testing rather than for proving the strong conjecture.




                                                       23
B     Ordinal secretary ratios under truncation
This appendix proves the two results about truncation stated in Section 3. Recall that ρ(M ) denotes the
optimal ordinal secretary ratio of a matroid M of positive rank, that M (k) denotes its rank-k truncation,
and that Conjecture 3.2 asserts that ρ(M (k) ) is nondecreasing in k. Section B.1 proves the conjecture for
uniform matroids in the strict form of Theorem B.2, and Section B.2 refutes it in general with an explicit
graphic matroid (Theorem B.6), following the method of the high-girth hardness theorem of Banihashem
et al. [BHK+ 25]. Since the upper bound in the counterexample allows the algorithm to observe numerical
weights, the conjecture also fails without the ordinal restriction.


B.1     Uniform matroids
Let r(n, k) denote the maximum expected fraction of the top k elements selected in a uniform random arrival
order by a policy that observes only relative ranks and has capacity k. Kleinberg’s ordinal algorithm [Kle05]
gives r(n, k) ≥ 1 − O(k −1/2 ). Chan, Chen, and Jiang [CCJ15] characterized asymptotically optimal thresholds
for the more general (J, K)-secretary problem, with separate selection and relevance parameters. We first
relate the top-k objective to the full weighted ordinal secretary problem, then compare the exact optima at
successive capacities. The comparison expresses k r(n, k) as the value of an optimal stopping problem with k
slots and independent rewards, namely the posterior probabilities that each arrival is among the top k given
its relative rank. Passing from k to k − 1 both lowers these rewards and removes a slot; Lemmas B.3 and B.4
bound the two effects separately.
The following equivalence between the top-k objective and the weighted ordinal ratio is standard: Buchbinder,
Jain, and Singh [BJS14] observe that a monotone policy for the (k, k)-secretary problem transfers its ratio to
the weighted problem, and that an optimal policy can be taken monotone. We include a self-contained proof;
the strict finite-n monotonicity in Theorem B.2 is the new claim.
Lemma B.1. For the uniform matroid Uk,n , ρ(Uk,n ) = r(n, k).

Proof. Symmetrizing over label permutations does not decrease a uniform matroid policy’s worst-case
guarantee, so labels can be ignored. Let Rt be the relative rank of arrival t, with rank one best. The variables
Rt are independent and uniform on [t], since relative-rank sequences are in bijection with permutations.
The set of global ranks observed by time t is a uniform t-subset, independent of its relative arrival order.
Conditional on the entire ordinal history through t, the posterior probability that the arrival is in the top k is

                   pk (t, Rt ),   pk (t, s) = Pr{Hk,t ≥ s},   Hk,t ∼ Hypergeometric(n, k, t).                (18)

Thus an optimal policy can use a Bellman rule depending only on time, remaining capacity, and the current
posterior. Since pk (t, s) is nonincreasing in s, the rule is nonincreasing in the current relative rank at each
fixed preceding history.
For any label-blind policy with this property, the probabilities of selecting global ranks 1, 2, . . . , n are
nonincreasing. Pair a permutation with the permutation exchanging ranks j and j + 1, using the same
random seed. Their histories and decisions agree until the later arrival of the pair. The earlier arrival receives
the same decision, and the later arrival is at least as likely to be selected when it is rank j. Averaging proves
the assertion.
Apply this to the optimal top-k policy. Every prefix of size m ≤ k has average capture probability at least
that of the top k. Every larger prefix has expected capture at least the top-k score and has rank k. Hence
all prefix-rank guarantees are at least r(n, k), implying ρ(Uk,n ) ≥ r(n, k). The reverse inequality follows by
taking weights arbitrarily close to one on the top k and arbitrarily close to zero outside, preserving the strict
order. Any ordinal weighted guarantee must therefore also hold for the top-k objective.

Albers and Ladewig [AL21] observed, in numerical computations for small k, that the competitive ratio
of a particular threshold algorithm increases with k. The following theorem compares the optimal ratios
themselves, for every finite n.



                                                       24
Theorem B.2. For 2 ≤ k ≤ n, r(n, k) > r(n, k − 1). In particular, the optimal ordinal secretary ratio is
strictly increasing through successive uniform matroid ranks.

Plan of the proof. By the posterior argument in the proof of Lemma B.1, the top-k problem is an optimal
stopping problem with k slots: at time t the policy sees the relative rank Rt , and accepting the arrival earns
expected reward pk (t, Rt ), its posterior probability of being among the top k. For independent nonnegative
finite-support rewards X = (X1 , . . . , Xn ), let Vb (X) be the optimal expected total reward from at most b
sequential selections, and define Xtk = pk (t, Rt ). Then

                                                 k r(n, k) = Vk (X k ),                                      (19)

since the expected number of top-k elements captured is the expected sum of the posteriors of the accepted
arrivals. The rewards Xtk are independent because the relative ranks Rt are independent, and past ranks
carry no information about future rewards beyond what the rewards themselves encode.
Passing from k to k − 1 changes two things: the reward sequence changes from X k to X k−1 , and one slot
is lost. We bound the two effects separately. Lemma B.4 shows that the rewards X k−1 are dominated, in
the sense relevant for optimal stopping, by the rewards obtained from X k by independently retaining each
with probability (k − 1)/k and zeroing the rest. Lemma B.3 shows that with such thinned rewards, k − 1
slots earn at most a (k − 1)/k fraction of what k slots earn on the unthinned rewards. Combining the two
gives (k − 1) r(n, k − 1) ≤ k−1
                             k k r(n, k), that is, r(n, k − 1) ≤ r(n, k), and a small explicit slack in the second
lemma makes the inequality strict.
Lemma B.3 (Thinning and capacity). Let 1 ≤ m < K, and let Bt be independent Bernoulli-(m/K) bits
independent of X. Then Vm ((Bt Xt )t ) ≤ (m/K)VK (X). The inequality is strict if VK (X) > Vm (X).

Proof. The idea is to build a K-slot policy on X out of many m-slot policies on thinned copies of X, and to
compare values. Color each time independently and uniformly from [K]; then for each m-element color set J,
the rewards Xt 1{Ct ∈ J} are exactly an (m/K)-thinning of X. For each such J, run the same deterministic
optimal m-selection policy on Xt 1{Ct ∈ J}. Choose this policy to reject zero rewards, and let ItJ be its
                            −1 P J
selections. Put at = K−1
                       m−1             P. Only color sets containing Ct can select at time t, so 0 ≤ at ≤ 1. Each
                                    J It
copy uses at most m slots, giving t at ≤ K on every realization.
Round these decisions online with one independent uniform U ∈ [0, 1). If Qt = i≤t ai , accept at time t
                                                                                        P
when ⌊Qt + U ⌋ − ⌊Qt−1 + U ⌋ = 1. This uses at most K slots. Conditional on all rewards and colors, its
marginal at time t is at , so its expected reward is (K/m)Vm ((Bt Xt )t ). Optimality proves the weak inequality.
With probability δ = K 1−n , all colors coincide. On this event the active copies see the same full reward
sequence and make identical decisions; the fractional rule is integral and uses at most m slots. For every
fixed color sequence the rounded rule is a feasible online policy on X, since the colors are independent of X.
Therefore the construction gives the stronger bound
                                     K
                                       Vm ((Bt Xt )t ) ≤ (1 − δ)VK (X) + δVm (X),                            (20)
                                     m
which proves strictness under the stated condition.
Lemma B.4 (Adjacent posteriors). For every convex function ϕ with ϕ(0) = 0, Eϕ(Xtk−1 ) ≤ k−1    k
                                                                                          k Eϕ(Xt ).

Proof. We couple the two posteriors by a single change to the hypergeometric population: change a uniformly
chosen one of the k successes to a failure. This turns a population with k successes into one with k − 1, so the
sample count for k − 1 is obtained from the sample count for k by possibly removing one success. A sample
with exactly s successes drops below s with probability s/k; no other count changes the tail event. Thus,
suppressing t, pk−1 (s) = k−s
                           k pk (s) + k pk (s + 1) for 1 ≤ s ≤ k − 1. Jensen’s inequality and summation give
                                       s


               k−1                     k−1                                        k
               X                     1 X                                    k−1X
                     ϕ(pk−1 (s)) ≤         (k − s)ϕ(pk (s)) + sϕ(pk (s + 1)) =       ϕ(pk (s)).
               s=1
                                     k s=1                                     k s=1

Terms beyond t vanish. Dividing by t proves the claim.


                                                          25
Proof of Theorem B.2. If independent rewards Z, W satisfy E(Zt − z)+ ≤ E(Wt − z)+ for every z ≥ 0, then
Vb (Z) ≤ Vb (W ). The Bellman update E max{v(b), Zt + v(b − 1)} = v(b) + E(Zt − [v(b) − v(b − 1)])+ is
increasing in both continuation values and has a nonnegative threshold, so backward induction applies.
Put m = k − 1, and thin X k with independent Bernoulli-(m/k) bits. Lemma B.4, with ϕ(x) = (x − z)+ ,
gives the preceding comparison between X m and (Bt Xtk )t . Using (19) and Lemma B.3,
                                                                    m
                        mr(n, m) = Vm (X m ) ≤ Vm ((Bt Xtk )t ) ≤     Vk (X k ) = mr(n, k).
                                                                    k
                                                                  −1
For strictness, the first k rewards of X k are all at least η = nk    > 0: indeed pk (t, s) ≥ pk (t, t) = n−t
                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                          k−t / k ≥
η for s ≤ t ≤ k. Simulate an optimal m-selection policy and use one extra slot on its first rejection among
these k times. This improves reward by at least η on every realization, so Vk (X k ) − Vm (X k ) ≥ η. Bound (20)
makes the displayed comparison strict. It also yields r(n, k) − r(n, k − 1) ≥ [k n nk ]−1 .

Corollary B.5. For every n ≥ 2 and 1 ≤ k ≤ n, ρ(Uk,n ) ≥ ρ(U1,n ) ≥ 1/e. Thus the strong matroid secretary
conjecture holds for every uniform matroid.

Proof. By Lemma B.1 and Theorem B.2, ρ(Uk,n ) = r(n, k) ≥ r(n, 1) = ρ(U1,n ). The rank-one matroid U1,n
is the classical secretary problem on n elements, for which the ordinal cutoff rule with cutoff s selects the
heaviest element with probability cn (s), and Section 4.6 exhibits a cutoff with cn (s) ≥ 1/e for every n ≥ 2.

The conclusion of Corollary B.5 is not new: the virtual algorithm of Babaioff, Immorlica, Kempe, and
Kleinberg [BIKK07, Theorem 1] is ordinal and selects every element of the top k with the classical cutoff
probability, which gives ρ(Uk,n ) ≥ 1/e directly. The corollary shows that the same conclusion also follows
from strict monotonicity alone, without any algorithm beyond the rank-one cutoff rule.


B.2     A graphic counterexample
As explained at the start of this appendix, nonmonotonicity follows from the high-girth hardness theorem of
Banihashem et al. [BHK+ 25] together with the uniform three-choice bound below, since a graph of girth at
least four has uniform rank-three truncation. Here we give a self-contained example on K2,N , following their
method of embedding independent single-secretary instances.

Theorem B.6. Let N = 1042 and let M be the cycle matroid of K2,N . Then

                                                            53
                                             ρ(M (3) ) >       > ρ(M ).
                                                           100
Since M has rank N + 1, some 4 ≤ k ≤ N + 1 satisfies ρ(M (k) ) < ρ(M (k−1) ).

There are no cycles of length at most three in this graph, so M (3) = U3,2N . We first give a uniform lower
bound above 0.53 for this three-choice problem, and then bound the unrestricted graphic problem below that
value.
A three-choice policy. On h ≥ 6 objects, reject through time ⌊h/6⌋, accept records until time ⌊h/2⌋, and
thereafter accept arrivals among the best three observed so far. Stop after three acceptances. Call an arrival
eligible if the policy would accept it were a slot available: a record in the first active phase, and an arrival
among the best three so far in the second. Ignoring the capacity, the eligibility indicators are independent,
with probabilities 1/t and 3/t in the two active phases. At scaled time x = t/h, the mean number of earlier
eligible arrivals converges to λ(x) = log(6x) in the first phase and λ(x) = log 3 + 3 log(2x) in the second. The
sum of squared eligibility probabilities is O(1/h), so the probability of fewer than three earlier eligible arrivals
tends to e−λ (1 + λ + λ2 /2).
In the first phase, the expected fraction gained before imposing capacity is 1/(3t) times the posterior that
the current record is in the global top three. This posterior tends to 1 − (1 − x)3 . In the second phase
every top-three arrival is eligible, so the expected fraction gained is exactly 1/h per arrival. The posterior



                                                           26
identity (18) and independence from past ranks let us multiply by the probability that a slot remains.
The resulting Riemann sum has limit

                                               [1 + log(6x) + 12 log2 (6x)](3 − 3x + x2 )
                                     Z 1/2
                              L∗ =                                                        dx
                                      1/6                         18x
                                              1 + λ(x) + 12 λ(x)2
                                         Z 1
                                     +                            dx.
                                          1/2       24x3

The Poisson approximation and record posterior converge uniformly within each phase, and the O(1/h)
boundary contributions vanish. Writing a = log 2 and b = log 3, integration gives

                                         3a2   ab 5a   b3   11b2   47b   425
                               L∗ = −        −   −   +    +      +     +     .
                                         32    16 32 36     144    144 1728
Substituting 0.693 < a < 0.694 and 1.098 < b < 1.099, using the upper endpoints in the negative terms and
lower endpoints in the positive terms, gives L∗ > 531/1000     P > 53/100. These logarithm enclosures follow,
for example, from six terms of log((1 + z)/(1 − z)) = 2 j≥0 z 2j+1 /(2j + 1) at z = 1/3, 1/2, bounding the
positive tail geometrically.
This limit lower-bounds r(n, 3) for every finite n ≥ 3. To simulate a policy on any larger horizon h, insert
h − n fictitious elements, all worse than the real elements, at uniformly random positions and in a random
order. All comparisons are computable online. Discard any fictitious selections while counting them in the
simulated policy’s capacity. The top-three score is unchanged, and the combined order is uniform. Taking
h → ∞ gives r(n, 3) ≥ L∗ . Lemma B.1 proves the required lower bound for M (3) .
A two-element distribution. Fix integers Q > 1 and L ≥ 1. Choose an index i ∈ {0, . . . , L − 1} with probability
                           PL−1
Q−(i+1) /Z, where Z = i=0 Q−(i+1) , and present the two values Qi , Qi+1 in random order. Their expected
maximum is µ = L/Z. An algorithm may know this distribution and observe numerical values. When the
first arrival is revealed, all the algorithm sees is its value Qj , which is consistent with two scales; let pj be the
probability of taking the first arrival when it equals Qj . Awarding the second value after a rejection can only
help, so the expected reward at scale i is at most
                                                                       h 1 + 1/Q (1 − 1/Q)(p
                                                                                             i+1 − pi )
                                                                                                        i
      1
           pi Qi + (1 − pi )Qi+1 + 21 pi+1 Qi+1 + (1 − pi+1 )Qi = Qi+1
                                                            
      2                                                                         +                         ,
                                                                            2             2
the two terms corresponding to which value arrives first. Each scale’s probability times Qi+1 is 1/Z, so
summing over i the differences pi+1 − pi telescope; using pL − p0 ≤ 1 bounds the expected reward by αµ,
where α = (1 + 1/Q)/2 + (1 − 1/Q)/(2L). The bound also permits any independent auxiliary randomness,
absorbed into the probabilities pj .
Embedding the pairs. The N degree-two vertices of K2,N partition the edges into pairs. Independently draw
the preceding distribution for each pair and randomly assign its values to its two labels. Reveal all edges in
uniform random order. For each pair, retain only the first edge selected by an arbitrary graphic secretary
algorithm. Fix the other pairs’ values, the arrival permutation, and the algorithm’s random seed; all are
independent of this pair’s scale and value assignment. Its first-arrival decision is then a function only of the
value revealed there, so the two-element bound applies conditionally. Averaging and summing over pairs
bounds the expected total weight of these first selections by N αµ. This holds even if the algorithm knows
the graph and the entire input distribution.
A forest can contain both edges of at most one pair, since two complete pairs form a four-cycle. There is
thus at most one extra selected edge, of weight at most QL . On the other hand, the heavier edge from each
pair forms a forest, so E OPT ≥ N µ. Thus E[reward]/E OPT ≤ α + QL /(N µ). For Q = 100, L = 21, and
N = QL , using Z < 1/99 makes this strictly less than 37/70 + 1/2079 < 53/100. Any guarantee valid on
every fixed instance also holds after averaging over this distribution, so ρ(M ) < 53/100. Together with the
uniform lower bound, this proves Theorem B.6.
The same matroid also disproves monotonicity for the optimal secretary ratio when algorithms can use
numerical weights. The uniform lower bound uses only ordinal information, and the graphic upper bound
permits numerical observations.


                                                             27
