                                                  THE DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS ON
                                                              HOMOGENEOUS SPACES




arXiv:math/0607815v1 [math.DS] 31 Jul 2006
                                              MANFRED EINSIEDLER, ELON LINDENSTRAUSS, PHILIPPE MICHEL AND AKSHAY
                                                                          VENKATESH


                                                      Abstract. We prove results towards the equidistribution of certain families
                                                      of periodic torus orbits on homogeneous spaces, with particular focus on the
                                                      case of the diagonal torus acting on quotients of PGLn (R). After attaching
                                                      to each periodic orbit an integral invariant (the discriminant) our results have
                                                      the following flavour: certain standard conjectures about the distribution of
                                                      such orbits hold up to exceptional sets of at most O(∆ǫ ) orbits of discriminant
                                                      ≤ ∆. The proof relies on the well-separatedness of periodic orbits together
                                                      with measure rigidity for torus actions. We also give examples of sequences
                                                      of periodic orbits of this action that fail to become equidistributed, even in
                                                      higher rank.
                                                         We give an application of our results to sharpen a theorem of Minkowski
                                                      on ideal classes in totally real number fields of cubic and higher degrees.




                                                                                       Contents
                                                1. Introduction.                                                                              1
                                                2. The description of periodic orbits                                                         9
                                                3. Periodic H-orbits and positive entropy                                                    16
                                                4. The action of H on quotients of central simple algebras                                   22
                                                5. Density and distribution of periodic orbits in higher rank                                31
                                                6. Applications to sharpening Minkowski’s theorem                                            34
                                                7. Examples of periodic orbits which do not equidistribute                                   36
                                                References                                                                                   41



                                                                                  1. Introduction.
                                             1.1. Periodic torus orbits. Let G = G(R) be a real algebraic group defined over
                                             Q (later we will specialize to the case of R-split groups), and Γ < G an arithmetic
                                             lattice.1 Let L be a closed subgroup of G. We say that an L-orbit on Γ\G is periodic
                                             if it possesses a finite L-invariant measure2. Periodic orbits of subgroups L < G on
                                             such arithmetic quotients have been studied in various context by several authors,
                                                Date: 7/27/2006.
                                                This research has been supported by the Clay Mathematics Institute (M.E. by a Clay Re-
                                             search Scholarship, E.L. and A.V. by fellowships), by the “Réseau arithmétique des Pyrénées” of
                                             Région Languedoc-Roussillon and the European TMR Network “Arithmetic Algebraic Geometry”
                                             (Ph.M.); and by the NSF (DMS grants 0509350 (M.E.), 0500205 (E.L.), 02045606 (A.V.) and an
                                             FRG collaborative grant.)
                                                1I.e. a lattice in G contained in G(Q).
                                                2This is not a completely standard definition, but is quite natural.

                                                                                             1
2             M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


and have proved to be a fruitful meeting ground of dynamics and number theory.
We note that there is nothing special about real algebraic groups: we could have
equally well considered p-adic or S-adic3 groups. We focus on real groups only to
simplify matters and for concreteness of exposition.
   The multiple facets of the study of periodic orbits on arithmetic quotients can
already be seen in the simple but important case of G = PGL2 . In this case, it is
well-known that the following objects are essentially in bijection:
    (1) Closed geodesics on the modular surface SL2 (Z)\H.
    (2) Periodic orbits of the diagonal subgroup of PGL2 (R) on the arithmetic
        quotient PGL2 (Z)\ PGL2 (R).                   √
    (3) Ideal classes in real quadratic orders (e.g. Z[ d] for d > 0).
   A natural question one is led to, when studying periodic L-orbits on arithmetic
quotients, is the following:
  Basic Question: to what extent do larger and larger periodic L-orbits fill out
more and more of Γ\G?
   If the group L is generated by its unipotent 4 elements, Ratner’s measure classifi-
cation theorem [37], together with a “linearization” technique developed in the work
of Ratner [38], Dani-Margulis [6], Shah [43] and elsewhere, can be used to give an
essentially complete answer to the basic question above: larger and larger periodic
L-orbits become equidistributed in Γ\G unless there are certain obvious obstacles
present (see e.g. [15] and [31] for such results with arithmetic consequences).
   Our aim in this paper and its sequels (currently two are planned) is to study
periodic orbits of a maximal R-split torus H < G on G/Γ for G = G(R) an R-split
group. Such groups H have by definition no unipotent elements whatsoever, and
their action is much less well-understood5. While much of our discussion is quite
general, we focus in the introduction and the later sections of this paper on the
following two concrete examples:
  (L-1) G = PGLn , G = PGLn (R), Γ = PGLn (Z)
  (L-2) DQ a degree n division algebra over Q, with DQ ⊗Q R ∼      = Mn (R), G the
         group associated to invertible elements of D modulo center, G = G(R) ∼    =
         PGLn (R) and Γ < G the lattice associated with an order OD in DQ .6
Identifying G ∼= PGLn (R), in both cases we can take H to be the group of n ×
n diagonal matrices7. Both examples come from a common family of lattices in
PGLn (R) arising from central simple algebras; in the first case Γ\G is not compact,
in the second it is.

1.2. Discriminant, shape and volume of periodic orbits. Let H be an R-split
maximal torus in G as above8. Note that since H is abelian, an orbit xH = ΓgH
of H is periodic if and only if xH is a compact subset of Γ\G.

    3I.e. products of real and p-adic groups (possibly for several different primes p).
   4An element g of a (linear) algebraic group G(K) is said to be unipotent if for some faithful
representation ρ of G, all eigenvalues of ρ(g) over the algebraic closure of K are equal to 1.
   5At least for dim H ≥ 2.
   6See §4.1 for a more complete discussion.
   7Considered as elements in PGL (R), i.e. with proportional matrices identified.
                                    n
   8A maximal torus in G is also called a Cartan subgroup, and we shall use the two terms
interchangeably.
                     DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                            3


   To such a periodic H-orbit we can attach several invariants. For example, we
can look at the “shape” of the orbit, i.e. the stabilizer g −1 Γg ∩ H of x, which is
a lattice in H. In particular, fixing a Haar measure on H, we can consider the
volume (or regulator) of the periodic orbit xH, which by definition is the covolume
of g −1 Γg ∩ H in H. We obtain another less obvious but nontheless important
invariant of the periodic orbit, the discriminant of xH (denoted disc(xH)), by
associating to each periodic orbit a rational point on an appropriate variety and
looking at the denominator of this point. By definition the discriminant is always
a positive integer.
   It turns out that the relative sizes of the discriminant and regulator of an orbits
play a crucial role in the study of these orbits. In general, discriminant and regulator
satisfy the following relations (see Proposition 2.8 below): there is some c (which
can be taken to be 1/2 + ǫ for the arithmetic quotients given in (L-1) and (L-2)
above) so that for any periodic H-orbit xH,

(1.1)                  log disc(xH) ≪ vol(xH) ≪ disc(xH)c

Our results, as well as the examples we give in Section 7, all give credence to
the general principle that the bigger the volume of a periodic orbit relative to its
discriminant, the better the orbit is behaved.
    By considering periodic orbits individually, as we do in this paper, one does not
take into account an important hidden symmetry of the problem. Returning to the
example of periodic H-orbits on PGL2 (Z)\ PGL2 (R), the “volume” of a periodic
orbit is simply its length, or equivalently the length of the corresponding closed
geodesics on SL(2, Z)\H, and the discriminant coincides with the discriminant of
the associated real quadratic other. As is well-known, the length spectrum of closed
geodesics in this case is far from simple.
    A similar property holds for all n, both for Γ = PGLn (Z) and more general
lattices constructed from central simple algebras and division algebras. The pe-
riodic H orbits naturally come in packets, with all orbits in a packet sharing the
same discriminant, regulator, and even shape. These packets can be understood as
projections to Γ\G of orbits of adelic Q-tori on G(Q)\G(A). The compact orbits
belonging to a single packet are therefore parameterized by a finite abelian group
– a suitable class group.
    One important property of these packets is that their total volume (which is
simply the volume of any single orbit in the packet times the number of such
periodic orbits) is equal to D1/2+o(1) where D is the discriminant of the packet —
i.e. essentially equal to the upper bound in (1.1). These packets are considered in
detail in [13, 14]. A coarser grouping of periodic orbits can be obtained by using
Hecke correspondences, and this is analyzed in [1].


1.3. Conjectures on higher rank rigidity. The dynamics of the group H is
drastically different in the rank one and higher rank cases. In the rank one case, for
example PGL2 (Z)\ PGL2 (R), the closing lemma assures us that each periodic orbit
individually can be distributed in an almost arbitrary way; the situation is very
different, however, if one considers packets of periodic orbits as will be explained
below.
4            M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


   In the higher rank cases, the dynamics is much more rigid. For example, G.
A. Margulis has highlighted the following conjecture, which is equivalent to a con-
jecture about the values of products of linear forms formulated by Cassels and
Swinerton-Dyer in 1955 [5]:
Conjecture 1.1. Let H be the subgroup of diagonal matrices in PGLn (R) for
n ≥ 3. Any bounded9 H-orbit in PGLn (Z)\ PGLn (R) is closed.
   There are also related conjectures regarding invariant measures, due to H. Fursten-
berg (unpublished), A. Katok and R. Spatzier [20], and G. A. Margulis [30]; a fairly
general variant of these conjectures can be found in [12, Conjecture 2.4]. Concretely
one expects the following:
Conjecture 1.2. Let n ≥ 3, G ∼       = PGLn (R), Γ < G a lattice as in examples
(L-1) or (L-2) above10. Let µ be an H-invariant and ergodic measure. Then µ
is homogeneous: i.e. there is a closed group L ≤ G so that µ is an L-invariant
measure on a single L-orbit.
   Given these conjectures, it is reasonable to expect that periodic orbits of H are
nicely distributed in Γ\G. Indeed, as remarked by Margulis, the following follows
from Conjecture 1.1 and the isolation results of [5]:
Conjecture 1.3. Let n ≥ 3. For any compact Ω ⊂ PGLn (Z)\ PGLn (R) there are
only finitely many periodic H-orbits contained in Ω.
1.4. Distribution and density of periodic orbits: statement of main re-
sults.
1.4.1. Periodic orbits and their approach to infinity, in the noncompact case. We
obtain the following towards Conjecture 1.3:
Theorem 1.4. Let n ≥ 3. For any compact Ω ⊂ PGLn (Z)\ PGLn (R) and any
ε > 0 the total volume of all periodic H-orbits contained in Ω of discriminant ≤ D
is ≪ε,Ω Dε .
    In contrast, for n = 2 we have the following:
Theorem 1.5. For every ε > 0 there is a compact Ω ⊂ PGL2 (Z)\ PGL2 (R) so
that the total length of all periodic H-orbits contained in Ω of discriminant ≤ D is
≫ǫ D1−ǫ .
  Further, even for n ≥ 3, individual orbits may fail to become equidistributed,
and, indeed, spend a positive fraction of their time “at ∞”, at least asymptotically
— see Section 1.5.
1.4.2. Density and distribution in the compact case. In the following results, let
Γ, G be as in (L-2) and n ≥ 3.
   Given a finite collection Y = {xi H : 1 ≤ i ≤ l} of periodic orbits, we define
                                                                  l
                                                                  X
                  disc(Y ) := max disc(xi H), vol(Y ) :=                vol(xi H).
                                1≤i≤l
                                                                  i=1
    9I.e. an orbit with compact closure.
    10More generally, any lattice coming from a central simple algebra over Q; examples due to
Rees [39] (a more accessible source is [9, Section 9]) show that in order to cover more general (even
cocompact) lattices in G the conjecture should be reformulated to allow for rank one factors (see
e.g. [30] or [12]).
                     DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                            5


Given such a collection Y , we let µY be the sum of volume measures on xi H,
normalized to have total mass 1.
Theorem 1.6. Let n ≥ 3 and let ρ > 0 be fixed. For each j ≥ 1, let Yj be a finite
collection of periodic H-orbits satisying disc(Yj ) → ∞ and vol(Yj ) ≥ disc(Yj )ρ .
Suppose there is no periodic orbit of a group H < L < G (with both inclusions
                                                               S         S
proper) containing infinitely many periodic orbits belonging to Yj . Then xj H =
Γ\G.
   Our precise distribution result is stated in Theorem 5.1, but is rather complicated
in general because of the existence of intermediate subgroups. For now we simply
state a corollary of that theorem:
Corollary 1.7. (to Theorem 5.1). Let Γ, G be as in (L-2) with n prime, and let
ρ > 0 be fixed.
    For each j ≥ 1, let Yj be a finite collection of periodic H-orbits satisfying
disc(Yj ) → ∞ and vol(Yj ) > disc(Yj )ρ . Then any weak limit µ of the µYj sat-
isfies
                            µ(B) ≥ cn .ρ.µHaar (B),
for any measurable set B ⊂ X; here µHaar is the G-invariant (Haar) probability
measure on Γ\G(R) and cn is a positive constant which depends on n only.
Example 1.8. A sequence {Yj }j≥1 to which this corollary applies is the following:
let V1 < V2 < · · · < Vj , . . . denote the “volume spectrum” of X (i.e. the sequence of
the volumes of all periodic H-orbits in increasing order), and let Yj be the collection
of all orbits of volume Vj . It can be shown that the hypothesis of Corollary 1.7 is
satisfied for any ρ < 1/2 and j large enough.
   More generally, we can rephrase the corollary in the following way. Fixing a
subset U ⊂ Γ\G(R), we call a periodic H-orbit (U, ε)-bad if the compact orbit
spends less than εµHaar (U ) time inside U . Then there is an constant cn > 0,
depending only on n, so that the total volume of (U, ε)-bad orbits of discriminant
≤ D is ≪ε,U Dεcn . In particular, the total volume of periodic orbits that fail to
intersect U and have discriminant ≤ D is ≪ε,U Dε .

1.4.3. Linnik’s principle. The key observation behind Theorem 1.4 and Theorem 1.6
is the following relation between total volume of a collection of periodic orbits in the
relation to their discriminants and the entropy of any weak∗ limit. In his book [26],
Yu. Linnik discusses several equidistribution problems, among them the equidistri-
bution of packets of periodic geodesic trajectories on PGL2 (Z)\ PGL2 (R). Central
to the proof of each of these equidistribution statements is a “basic lemma” which
can be viewed as an implicit form of such a relation between volume and entropy,
and so we call this general phenomenon Linnik’s Principle.
Theorem 1.9 (Linnik’s Principle). For i ≥ 1, let Yi be a collection of periodic
H-orbits in X = Γ\G satisfying disc(Yi ) → ∞ and vol(Yi ) ≥ disc(Yi )ρ , for some
fixed ρ > 0. Let µi = µYi be the probability measure associated with Yi . Suppose
that µi → µ as i → ∞ in the weak∗ topology for some probability measure µ. Then
for any regular h ∈ H there is an explicit ch > 0 (depending only on h) so that
                                     hµ (h) ≥ ch ρ.
6           M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


1.5. Counterexamples to equidistribution. Theorems 1.4 and 1.6 as well as
Corollary 1.7 fall far short of one possible candidate for an answer to the basic
question of Section 1.1: that possibly periodic H-orbits of increasing volume which
do not lie in any periodic orbits of a bigger group11 become equidistributed in Γ\G.
This is not just because of technical difficulties; indeed, this plausible statement
regarding equidistribution of H-orbits is false, and the number of periodic H-orbits
which fail to be equidistributed is asymptotically bigger than Dα for some strictly
positive α:
Theorem 1.10. Let n ≥ 2. There is a sequence of periodic H-orbits xi H on the
space PGLn (Z)\ PGLn (R) and α, δ > 0 such that
    (1) any weak∗ limit of the probability measures µxi H supported on these periodic
        H-orbits has total mass < 1 − δ.
    (2) the total volume vol({xi H : disc(xi H) < D}) ≫ Dα .
This theorem is proved by an explicit construction (using a construction of Duke
[8]) suggested to us by P. Sarnak; a closely related construction in the special case
of n = 2 can be found in [42].
    One might hope escape of mass to infinity is the only possible obstacle to equidis-
tribution of periodic H-orbits, and that things are nicer in the compact case. For
example, one might hope that Corollary 1.7 could be sharpened to give equidistri-
bution, i.e. that the limiting measure µ = µHaar . Even this seems highly unlikely.
    While we do not have a counterexample in this particular setting (i.e. G ∼       =
PGL(n, R) and Γ as in (L-2), with n ≥ 3) we believe the following is likely: that
for any periodic H-orbits x0 H in Γ\G, there should exists collections Yi of periodic
H-orbits with discriminants in the range [∆i , 2∆i ] and with vol(Yi ) ≫ ∆α  i so that
µi converge weak∗ to a measure µ assigning positive measure to the given periodic
H-orbit x0 H. Moreover, we give an explicit construction of this type in the S-
arithmetic context in [13].
    Besides showing the limit of what one may hope to prove regarding periodic
torus orbits, these examples also point out to an important difference between torus
actions and the action of groups generated by unipotents: linearization techniques
à la Ratner, Dani-Margulis and Shah do not work for torus actions, at least not
on the level of individual periodic orbits, and moreover any substitute for these
techniques will either have to assume much more or give much less12.

1.6. A conjecture. Evidence from harmonic analysis. The construction of
nonequidistributing periodic orbits described in Section 1.5 involve orbits xi H that
have very small volume relative to their discriminant: vol(xi H) behaves as a poly-
nomial in log disc(xi H). We conjecture that this is the only source of bad behavior:
Conjecture 1.11. Fix ρ > 0. Let G = G(R) be an R-split real algebraic group,
Γ < G an arithmetic lattice, and H a maximal R-split torus. Let xi H be a sequence
of periodic H-orbits satisfying vol(xi H) ≥ disc(xi H)ρ . Then any weak limit of the
measures µxi H is algebraic.

    11More formally, that there is no periodic orbits of a group L with H < L < G containing
infinitely many of these periodic H-orbits.
    12Indeed, to prove Theorems 1.4 and 1.6 we use isolation results [5, 25] which can be viewed
as a poor person’s substitute for linearization techniques.
                    DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                           7


   We emphasize that the above Conjecture does not exclude the case of G = PGL2 .
At first sight, this may appear too optimistic, in view of the discussion of Section
1.3. However, we expect the large torus orbits considered in Conjecture 1.11 to
enjoy a form of rigidity even in the case dim H = 1. The reason for this is related
to the concept of packets, mentioned in Section 1.2. As remarked there, one may
group the compact orbits into collections (packets) which admit an action of an
adelic group and have total volume disc1/2+o(1) .
   It is likely that the large torus orbits considered in Conjecture 1.11 will retain
an action of a usable subgroup of this adelic group. This extra action provides a
substitute for a rank 2 torus action.
   Besides the results of §1.4, there exists further evidence for Conjecture 1.11,
based on recent progress in the analytic theory of L-functions. Let us restrict to
Γ = PGLn (Z), G = PGLn (R). In this context, the exponent α = 1/2 is critical,
because the total volume of all orbits of discriminant D is always ≫ǫ D1/2−ǫ . In
the case n = 2, work of the third author with Harcos [17] implies the conjecture for
α slightly less than 1/2. Moreover, the GRH implies the conjecture for all α > 1/4.
These results use (in addition to, respectively, the results of [17] and the GRH) the
relationship between torus orbits and Rankin-Selberg L-functions, established in
the work of Waldspurger, Katok-Sarnak and Popa (see e.g. [34, Theorem 6.5.1]).
   It is worth emphasizing here that α = 1/4 mark the limit of “naive” harmonic
analysis. One advantage of the ergodic theoretic methods used in this paper is that
results such as Corollary 1.7 yield nontrivial information even for very small α. In
[14], we shall combine harmonic analysis and ergodic methods to obtain results for
n = 3.

1.7. Analogy with ×2 × 3. The dynamics of x 7→ 2x, x 7→ 3x on R/Z are, in many
ways, similar to the action of the diagonal group on PGLn (R)/ PGLn (Z). Here the
periodic points are exactly the rationals x = p/q with (p, q) = 1 = (q, 6).
   Then the orbit 2n .3m .x has two natural invariants: the size g (i.e. the order of
the group h2, 3i ⊂ (Z/qZ)× ) and the denominator q. These are analogues of the
volume and discriminant of a compact H-orbit. Again, the relation between these
two is a mystery, especially as far as how small g can be; we do not even know that
g ≥ 100(log q)2 .
   In their paper [3] Bourgain, Glibichuk and Konyagin prove:
Theorem 1.12 (Bourgain-Glibichuk-Konyagin). Let ρ > 0 be fixed. Let q be prime
and let G ⊂ (Z/qZ)× be a subgroup satisfying |G| > q ρ . Then for any a ∈ (Z/qZ)× ,
we have:
                             X
                                 e2πiax/q ≤ |G|q −δ
                               x∈G
where δ > 0 depends only on ρ.
   In particular, if q is a prime so that the order of h2, 3i ⊂ (Z/qZ)× is large,
then this theorem implies the periodic orbits of ×2 × 3 with denominator q are
equidistributed individually, as q → ∞, in analogy with Conjecture 1.11. The
restriction that q be prime has been lifted in [4] and subsequent work.
   The analogy with ×2 × 3 is also useful to illustrate, in an explicit context, many
of the ideas that are used in this paper. In this vein, we present the analogue of
Corollary 1.7 as well as a sketch of its proof.
8             M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


Proposition 1.13. Fix ρ > ρ′ > 0 and a subinterval J ⊂ R/Z. Let S ⊂ q −1 Z/Z
be invariant under x 7→ 2x, x 7→ 3x and so that |S| > q ρ . Then, for sufficiently
large q, we have
                              |S ∩ J|
                                      ≥ ρ′ length(J)
                                |S|
  Equivalently: let Si ⊂ qi−1 Z/Z with |Si | > qiρ be invariant under x 7→ 2x, x 7→ 3x.
Let µi be the corresponding normalized measure13. Then any weak limit of the µi
dominates ρ.µLebesgue.

Proof. We make free use of the notion of entropy.14 Let P be the partition of R/Z
into [0, 1/2) ∪ [1/2, 1); let P (n) := P ∨ [2]−1 P ∨ . . . [2n−1 ]−1 P. Here [m]−1 P denotes
the partition into {x : mx ∈ [0, 1/2)} and its complement.
   Let ni be minimal so that 2ni > qi . Then any two elements of Si lie in distinct
parts of the partition P (ni ) . From this it follows that Hµi (P (ni ) ) > log(qi ). By the
subadditivity of entropy,
             Hµi (P (ni ) ) ≤ Hµi (P) + Hµi ([2]−1 P) + · · · + Hµi ([2ni −1 ]−1 P)
Because µi is invariant under x 7→ 2x, the summands on the right-hand side are
equal. Therefore, Hµi (P) ≥ logn|Si
                                    i|
                                       . Passing to the limit, we conclude that any
weak limit µ of the µi satisfies:
(1.2)                                    Hµ (P) ≥ ρ log 2.
   By a simple variation of this argument, one verifies that Hµ (P (k) ) ≥ kρ log 2.
This implies that the entropy of the transformation x 7→ 2x w.r.t. µ is ≥ ρ log 2.
   We may now apply the following theorem of Rudolph [41]: A probability measure
on R/Z, ergodic and invariant for ×2 × 3, which has positive entropy w.r.t. ×2, is
Lebesgue measure.
   To apply it, we decompose µ into ergodic components with respect to ×2 × 3.
Because any probability measure on R/Z has entropy ≤ log 2 w.r.t. ×2, it follows
that µ must dominate a measure µ′ with total mass ≥ ρ and so that almost every
ergodic component of µ′ has positive entropy w.r.t. ×2. By Rudolph’s theorem, µ′
dominates ρ.µLebesgue.                                                             
   The key points in the above proof were: the fact that elements of Si were well-
separated at a small scale (namely qi−1 ); the use of subadditivity of entropy; and
Rudolph’s theorem. The proof of most of the results of this paper, including Corol-
lary 1.7, will use similar ideas in the Γ\G context. The well-separated property is
established in Proposition 2.3, and we replace the use of Rudolph’s theorem with
the results of [11].
Acknowledgements. The present paper is part of a project that began on the
occasion of the AIM workshop “Emerging applications of measure rigidity” on June
2004 in Palo Alto. It is a pleasure to thank the American Institute of Mathematics,
as well as the organizers of the workshop. We would also like to thank Peter
Sarnak for his suggestions, comments, and for his constant encouragement during
the elaboration of this paper.
    13That is, µ (f ) =    1 P
                i         |Si | x∈Si f (x) for a continuous function f on R/Z.
   14See (3.6) for the definition and [22] for background. We will use the fact – subadditivity of
entropy – that Hµ (P ∨ Q) ≤ Hµ (P) + Hµ )(Q) for two partitions P, Q.
                      DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                              9


  While working on this project the authors visited the following institutions:
Princeton University (Ph. M.), the Center of Mathematical Sciences, Zhejiang
University (Ph. M. and A. V.), the Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientifiques (Ph.
M. and A. V.). The support of these institutions are gratefully acknowledged.

                     2. The description of periodic orbits
   Let notation be as in Section 1.2.
   Our aim in this section is to discuss the parameterization of periodic Cartan
orbits and to attach to each orbit an integral invariant, the discriminant. The
point is that periodic orbits will be parameterized by rational points on a certain
variety (namely, the variety of tori inside G) and the discriminant will be the
denominator of the associated point.
    (1) Two periodic orbits of discriminant ≤ D cannot be too close: if Ω ⊂ G is
        compact, and gi ∈ Ω are such that g1 H 6= g2 H, and Γgi H are periodic,
        then the distance between g1 , g2 is ≫Ω D−1 . (See Proposition 2.4, which
        shows a sharper form of this statement).
    (2) A periodic orbit of discriminant ≤ D cannot go too close to ∞ – this is of
        relevance only if Γ\G is noncompact (Proposition 2.5.)
    (3) The volume of a periodic orbit of discriminant D is bounded, up to con-
        stants, between log D and Dc , for c > 0 (Proposition 2.8).
    (4) The number of periodic Cartan orbits of discriminant ≤ D is bounded, up
        to constants, between DA and DB , for A, B > 0 (Proposition 2.9).
   A serious omission in the present account will be that we will avoid any explicit
discussion of packets, the natural equivalence relation on periodic orbits. This will
be discussed in the paper [14]; see also Remark 4.5 in the present paper.
   The paramaterization of periodic orbits that we present here is essentially well-
known; see e.g. [32]. The primary goal of this section is, rather, to define the
discriminant and show that it crudely controls the dynamics of the orbit, as dis-
cussed above.
   In Section 4.1 we will specialize some of the discussion presented here to algebraic
groups defined by central simple algebras and to the case of PGLn .
2.1. Notation. As a general rule, we will use boldface letters for algebraic varieties,
algebraic groups and so forth.
   Let G be a semisimple group over Q and put G = G(R). We will assume
throughout this document that G is split over R. While the techniques and ideas
extend to the general case, this assumption allows for the most elegant and coherent
treatment.
   Let Γ be an arithmetic subgroup of G that is commensurable with G(Q) ∩
GL(n, Z) for some fixed embedding ρ of G into GL(n) defined over Q. Let X = Γ\G
be the associated homogeneous space. Let g = Lie(G) be the Lie algebra of G; thus
g is a Lie algebra over Q. We fix once and for all a lattice gZ in g and a G-invariant
nondegenerate bilinear symmetric form B(·, ·) defined by
                               B(X, Y ) = Tr(ρ(X)ρ(Y ))
for some fixed faithful representation ρ. We assume that these choices have the
properties that: gZ is stable by the adjoint action of Γ, B(gZ , gZ ) ⊂ Z, and [gZ , gZ ] ⊂
gZ . We can always find such a gZ (once one has a Γ-stable lattice, a suitable integral
multiple of it will satisfy the latter two properties).
10           M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


   Let H be an R-split Cartan subgroup of G (i.e. H is the centralizer of a split
Cartan subalgebra of g⊗ R.) The chosen data fix a Haar measure on H: the form B
restricted to the Lie algebra h = Lie(H) is nondegenerate and we shall use the Haar
measure on H determined by a top differential form on h self-dual with respect to
B.
   Fix an Euclidean norm k·k on g; this also induces an Euclidean norm on ∧ℓ g for
any ℓ. The choice of Euclidean norm on g determines a left invariant Riemannian
metric d(·, ·) on G which induces also a metric on X = Γ\G.
   Recall (see, e.g. [46, Remark 3.6]) that for any R > −1 the set
              Ω(R) = Γg : Ad(g −1 )v ≥ R−1 for all nonzero v ∈ gZ
                       
(2.1)
                   S
is compact with R Ω(R) = Γ\G. It can easily be shown, e.g. using reduction
theory 15 that every x ∈ Ω(R) can be represented as x = Γg for some g with
kAd(g)k ≪ R; here k Ad(g)k denotes the operator norm of Ad(g). with respect to
the fixed Euclidean norm on g.
   Finally, in what follows, we will allow the implicit constant in constructions such
as O(·), ≪, ≫ to depend on the data fixed above (in particular G, Γ, gZ ).

2.2. The parameterization of periodic orbits. We discuss in this section how
to parameterize periodic orbits of H on X.
   Given a periodic orbit ΓgH of H on X, the stabilizer in H of any point in this
orbit, i.e. H ∩g −1 Γg, is necessarily a cocompact lattice in H. The Zariski closure of
Γ ∩ gHg −1 is then a torus T defined over Q with the property that T(R) = gHg −1 .
The fact that Γ ∩ T(R) is an arithmetic cocompact subgroup of T(R) assures us
that T is Q-anisotropic. 16
Proposition 2.1 (Basic correspondence). There is a canonical bijection between
     (1) periodic H-orbits ΓgH on Γ\G, and
     (2) Γ-orbits on pairs (T, gH). Here T is a maximal Q-torus that is anisotropic
         and R-split, and gH ∈ G/H is such that gHg −1 = T(R), and γ ∈ Γ acts
         via (T, gH) 7→ (γTγ −1 , γgH).
Proof. The correspondence has already been indicated: to a periodic H-orbit ΓgH
we associate (T, gH), where T is the Zariski closure of Γ ∩ gHg −1 . In the reverse
direction, we associate to (T, gH) the orbit ΓgH; it is compact because Γ ∩ T(R)
is a cocompact lattice in T(R).                                                  

   We remark that T, which is necessarily R-split, determines the periodic H-
orbit up to finitely many possibilities. Indeed, each T corresponds to precisely one
periodic NG (H)-orbit, and so to at most |H\NG(H)| many periodic H-orbits.

    15Indeed, fix a maximally Q-split torus T ⊂ G, and let A = T (R). Take x ∈ Ω(R). It has
                                              0                  0    0
by reduction theory a representative δ.a.κ ∈ G, where a ∈ A0 , δ belongs to a finite subset of G(Q),
and κ belongs to a fixed compact subset of G. But then inf v∈g Z k Ad(g)−1 vk is bounded above and
below by multiples of k Ad(a−1 )k, because the eigenspaces of Ad(a−1 ) are Q-rational subspaces
of g. Moreover, k Ad(a−1 )k is bounded above and below by multiples of k Ad(g −1 )k. Finally, note
that k Ad(g)k is bounded from above and below by multiples of supkuk,kvk=1 |B(Ad(g)u, v)| and
so also by multiples of k Ad(g −1 k.
    16A character χ defined on T over Q would map the integer points T(Z) to a subgroup χ(T(Z))
of Q× whose elements allow a common denominator, clearly this subgroup must be trivial and so
the same holds for χ since T(Z) is a cocompact subgroup of T(R).
                       DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                                 11


2.3. The discriminant of a periodic orbit. We would like to attach to each
periodic orbit x0 H a positive integral invariant, the discriminant.
   We will do this by means of the correspondence of Proposition 2.1: we will assign
a positive integer to each maximal Q-torus contained in G, in a Γ-invariant fashion.
This will be done by interpreting Q-torii as rational points on some variety, and
interpreting the discriminant as the “least common denominator” in the coordinates
of these points.17
   Let r be the rank of G. The bilinear form B on g gives rise to a bilinear form
B∧ on ∧r g determined by
                 B∧ (x1 ∧ · · · ∧ xr , y1 ∧ · · · ∧ yr ) = det(B(xi , yj ))ri,j=1 .
Set V = ∧r g ⊗ ∧r g, VZ = ∧r gZ ⊗ ∧r gZ .
   For g ∈ G, we will often use the notation Ad(g) to denote the natural action of
g ∈ G on any of g (the adjoint action), ∧r g and V .
   For any maximal R-split Cartan subalgebra t < g we define ι(t) ∈ V by taking
any w ∈ ∧r t and setting
                                           w⊗w
(2.2)                            ι(t) =             .
                                          B∧ (w, w)
    Since the form B restricted to an R-split Cartan subalgebra t is positive definite,
for any nonzero w ∈ ∧r t we have that B∧r g (w, w) > 0. If t is the Lie algebra
of a Q-torus, tZ = t ∩ gZ is a lattice in t. Choose a basis e1 , . . . , er of tZ ; then
w = e1 ∧ · · · ∧ er is a primitive element of ∧r gZ , B∧ (w, w) is a positive integer, and
is the smallest integer n such that nι(t) ∈ VZ .
    The map g 7→ ghg −1 gives a bijection between G/NG (H) and R-split Cartan
subalgebras of g, hence we can view ι as a map from G/NG (H) to V . If ΓgH is a
periodic H orbit ghg −1 is the Lie algebra of an R-split Q-torus of G.
Definition 2.2. Let t be the Lie algebra of a maximal R-split Q-torus of G; We
define the discriminant disc(t) = min{n ∈ N : nι(t) ∈ VZ }. We define the discrim-
inant of the periodic orbit ΓgH to be the discriminant of ghg −1 .
  We remark that disc(Ad(γ)t) = disc(t) for γ ∈ Γ, by virtue of the assumption
that gZ is invariant under the adjoint action of Γ, and hence the discriminant of a
periodic orbit is well-defined.

2.4. Discriminant, discreteness and related properties of closed orbits.
The definition of the discriminant of periodic H-orbits, and its interpretation in
terms of integral points on hypersurfaces, imply several useful facts. The fact that
integral points are spaced by ≥ 1 translates to the following basic proposition, show-
ing that two periodic H-orbits of small discriminant cannot be too close. Though
simple, this observation is absolutely crucial to our approach.
Proposition 2.3. (Discreteness of periodic orbits – weaker form.) Let Ω ⊂ G be a
fixed compact subset of G. Suppose g1 , g2 ∈ Ω are so that Γgi H are periodic orbits
of discriminant ≤ D with g1 NG (H) 6= g2 NG (H). Then d(g1 , g2 ) ≫Ω D−2 .

   17We remark that this “discriminant” is not a canonical construction, e.g. it depends on the
choices of the lattice gZ and the bilinear symmetric form B(·, ·). However, as we will see later
we have set it up so that it agrees with the notion of discriminant for a number field or order
(assuming the right choices have been made).
12          M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


   Note that we do not assume that Γg1 NG (H) 6= Γg2 NG (H), i.e. the proposition
also describes how close a particular periodic orbit can come to itself.

Proof. Let ti = Ad(gi )h. Then kι(t1 ) − ι(t2 )k ≫ D−2 , as is clear from (2.2). But
the map g 7→ ι(Ad(g)h) is a smooth map from Ω to ∧r g; in particular, it cannot
increase distances by more than a constant factor depending on Ω.                 

  Actually we prefer to give a slightly sharper version of this result, which both
explicates the dependence on Ω and gives better dependence on D.
Proposition 2.4. (Discreteness of periodic orbits – sharper form.) Suppose g1 , g2
satisfy k Ad(gi )k ≤ R and are such that Γgi H are periodic orbits of discriminant
Di respectively with g1 NG (H) 6= g2 NG (H) Then
                                 (
                                   R−r D−1/2         D = D1 = D2
                   d(g1 , g2 ) ≫                                 .
                                   R−2r (D1 D2 )−1/2 D1 6= D2

Proof. Let Γgi H be periodic, ti = gi hgi−1 and Di = disc(Γgi H). Let w0 ∈ ∧r h be
such that B∧ (w0 , w0 ) = 1 (this fixes w0 up to sign), and set wi = Ad(gi )[w0 ]. Since
g1 NG (H) 6= g2 NG (H) we have that w1 6= w2 .
                                                                  1/2
    It follows from the definition of discriminant that Di wi ∈ ∧r gZ . Indeed, if
e1 , . . . , er are a basis of ti ∩ gZ then w = e1 ∧ · · · ∧ er ∈ ∧r gZ is an element of ∧r t
                                                    1/2
with B∧ (w, w) = Di . On the other hand Di wi has the same property; hence
  1/2
Di wi = ±w ∈ ∧r gZ .
    Consider first the case D1 = D2 = D. Then, since D1/2 w1 and D1/2 w2 are
                                                                    1
two distinct “integral points”, we have kw1 − w2 k ≫ D− 2 , i.e. k Ad(g1 )w0 −
Ad(g2 )w0 k ≫ D−1/2 .
   The operator norm of Ad(g1 ) acting on g is ≤ R; therefore, the operator norm
of Ad(g1 ) acting on ∧r g is ≤ Rr , and we conclude that
                          kw0 − Ad(g1−1 g2 )w0 k ≫ R−r D−1/2 .
This shows that d(g1 , g2 ) = d(e, g1−1 g2 ) ≫ R−r D−1/2 .
                                                1/2        1/2
   Now consider the case D1 6= D2 . Then D1 w1 and D2 w2 are two nonpropor-
tional integer points, hence they span a parallelogram of area ≫ 1 and so
                               1/2                 1/2
(2.3)                        D2 (w2 − w1 )       D1 w1 ≫ 1.

  As before, the operator norm of Ad(g1 ) on ∧r g is ≤ Rr , so kw1 k = kAd(g1 )w0 k ≪
Rr and so from (2.3) we get that
                             kw1 − w2 k ≫ R−r (D1 D2 )−1/2 .
Proceeding again as in the previous case, we see that d(g1 , g2 ) ≫ R−2r (D1 D2 )−1/2 .
                                                                                    

  The discriminant also bounds how high a periodic H orbit can penetrate the
cusps of Γ\G. Recall (2.1) for the definition of Ω(·).
Proposition 2.5. Let ΓgH be a periodic H-orbit of discriminant D. Then Γg ∈
Ω(cDdim g/2 ) for some constants c > 0 (independent of g).
                       DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                                  13


Proof. The idea is that h∩Ad(g −1 )gZ has (by definition of discriminant, and lattice
reduction) a basis consisting of vectors that are not too long. From this, we need
to finesse that the same is actually true for Ad(g −1 )gZ . But if it contained short
vectors, they would generate a nilpotent subalgebra n normalized by h; this would
mean that Ad(g)n would be a Q-rational nilpotent algebra normalized by t =
Ad(g)h, a contradiction, for the associated torus is anisotropic.
   Let e1 , . . . , er be a basis for t ∩ gZ . Since B(ei , ej ) ∈ Z for every i, j and
det(B(ei , ej )) = D, lattice reduction shows that we can choose the basis ei so
that B(ei , ei ) ≤ c0 D, the constant c0 depending only on r. Since e′i := Ad(g)ei ∈ h,
and on h the form B(·, ·) is positive definite, this implies that
                    ke′i k ≤ c′1 B(e′i , e′i )1/2 ≤ c1 D1/2   for 1 ≤ i ≤ r.
Therefore, h∩Ad(g )gZ has a basis of vectors of length ≤ c1 D1/2 . We may assume
                      −1

c1 > 1, increasing it if necessary.
   On the other hand, there is some c2 ≥ 1 so that
                                     k[v, w]k ≤ c2 kvk kwk .
For i ≥ 0, let gi be the subspace spanned by X ∈ Ad(g −1 )gZ with kXk ≤
c−1
 2 (c2 c1 D
            1/2 −i
               ) . Then for i ≥ 1 we have [h, gi ] ⊂ gi−1 ; moreover, for any i, j ≥ 1
we have [gi , gj ] ⊂ gi+j . So there is i ≤ dim(g) so that gi = gi+1 . Then n := Ad(g)gi
is, if nonempty, a t = Ad(g)h-stable nilpotent subalgebra of g defined over Q.
    It follows that t normalizes the nilpotent Lie algebra Ad(g)n, which is defined
over Q. But this is a contradiction unless n is trivial, for T is anisotropic.18
    We conclude that Ad(g −1 )gZ had no nonzero elements of norm ≤ c3 D− dim g/2 .
                                                                                      

   The exponent here could be considerably improved. It is easy to see, for in-
stance, that the exponent dim g/2 could be replaced by 1/2 for G = PGL2 (see
also Corollary 4.2). This is indeed sharp:
Example 2.6. Let G = PGL2 (R), Γ = PGL2 (Z), H the   group of  diagonal matrices
                                                       1      1
and d a square free positive integer. Then for g = √          √    the point Γg is
                                                        d − d
periodic under H, of discriminant a constant
                                            multiple
                                                       of d (assuming one makes
                               19           0 1
the obvious choices for gZ etc. ) Take v =          ∈ gZ . Then
                                            0 0
                                      √           √ 
                                   1 1/ d       1/
                         Ad(g)v =         √        √d .
                                   2 −1/ d −1/ d
This implies g ∈ Ω(c0 d1/2 ) for a suitable absolute constant c0 .
   We recall the following useful fact about H-orbits:
Theorem 2.7 (Tomanov and Weiss [46, Thm 1.3]). There is an R0 so that for
every x ∈ Γ\G we have that Ω(R0 ) ∩ xH 6= ∅.

    18Over an algebraic closure, t ⊕ n is solvable and so contained in a Borel subalgebra, and so
all the roots of T on n are positive in a suitable system. This means that the determinant of the
action of T on n cannot be trivial, and so defines a nontrivial character of T.
    19These (unilluminating) choices are set up for PGL (Z)\ PGL (R) in Section 4.
                                                          n         n
14           M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


   There is a relation between the discriminant and the volume of a periodic H-
orbit. This connection is explicated in the context of central simple algebras in
§4.1. Here we give the following general (and less accurate) bounds:

Proposition 2.8. Let Γg0 H be periodic H-orbit. Then

(2.4)                 log disc(Γg0 H) ≪ vol(Γg0 H) ≪ disc(Γg0 H)c .

for some c.

Proof. Let x0 = Γg0 be a point with x0 H a periodic H-orbit. By Theorem 2.7, we
may assume g0 is in some fixed compact subset Ω ⊂ G. Since g0 ∈ Ω, there are
generators h1 , . . . , hr of g0−1 Γg0 ∩ H (possibly up to finite index) so that

                       vol(x0 H) = vol(g0−1 Γg0 \H) ≫ max d(e, hi ).
                                                              i

It follows that, if one chooses a basis of g belonging to the lattice gZ , then Ad(γi ) =
Ad(g0 hi g0−1 ) is represented (w.r.t. this basis) by an integral matrix all of whose
coordinates are exp(O(vol(x0 H))).
    The Lie algebra g0 hg0−1 is precisely the subspace fixed by the action of all γi .
Thus there is20 a nonzero w ∈ ∧r gZ ∩ ∧r g0 hg0−1 with kwk ≪ exp(O(vol(x0 H))).
One concludes:

                      log disc(x0 H) ≤ log B∧r g (w, w) ≪ vol(x0 H).

This proves the lower bound in (2.4).
   To prove the upper bound in (2.4), let S ⊂ G be such that G = ΓS and S
has finite Haar measure. An example of such a set is furnished by Siegel domains
(see [2, Sec. 4]). Let S(R) = {g ∈ S : Γg ∈ Ω(R)}. These Siegel domains have
the following additional property which will be useful for us (and is easily verified
directly from their definition): for a suitable C, β > 0

                        µHaar (BR−β (S(R))) < C            for all R > 0

where Bδ (S) = {g ∈ G : d(g, S) < δ}.
                                                                       dim g/2
   Let D = disc(x0 H). By Proposition 2.5, the orbit x0 H ⊂ ΓS(cD S            ), and so
we can write x0 H ⊂ G as a (finite or countable) disjoint union i∈J ΓSi with each
Si ⊂ gi H ∩ S(cDdim g/2 ) for some gi ∈ G lying in distinct cosets of H. Let J ′ ⊂ J
be such that gi NG (H) 6= gj NG (H) for every i, j ∈ J ′ and such that
                                     X
                                         vol(Si )
                                          i∈J ′

is maximal among all possible choices of J ′ . Then i∈J ′ vol(Si ) ≫ vol(x0 H).
                                                      P
   By Proposition 2.4, for every pair i, j ∈ J ′ with i 6= j we have that

                        Bδ (Si ) ∩ Bδ (Sj ) = ∅       for δ ≤ 2c4 D−c5

   20Given integer matrices in M (Z), all of whom have all matrix entries ≤ N , it is easy to see –
                                n
Siegel’s lemma – that their common kernel, if nonempty, contains an element of length ≪ N c(n) ,
where c(n) depends only on n.
                      DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                           15


0 < c4 < 1 and c5 ≥ β being some constants independent of x0 . Then
                        1 ≫ µHaar (Bc4 D−c5 (S(cDdim g/2 )))
                            X
                          ≥    µHaar (Bc4 D−c5 (Si ))
                              i∈J ′
                              X             ′             ′
                          ≫           D−c vol(Si ) ≫ D−c vol(x0 H).
                              i∈J ′

                                                                                      
Proposition 2.9. Let N (D) be the number of periodic orbits with discriminant
less than D. Then there exists c1 , c2 such that Dc1 ≪ N (D) ≪ Dc2 .
First proof of upper bound. Our proof of the upper bound on the volume of a pe-
riodic orbit in Proposition 2.8 applies equally well to a union of periodic orbits of
a common discriminant. In other words, the proof of that proposition gives that if
x1 H, . . . , xn H are distinct periodic H orbits with disc(x1 H) = · · · = disc(xn H) =
D then                               X
                                        vol(xi H) ≪ Dc
                                        i
hence the total volume of all periodic orbits of discriminant ≤ D is ≪ Dc+1 .
  By the lower bound in Proposition 2.8, the volume of a periodic H-orbit is ≫ 1,21
and we conclude that N (D) ≪ Dc+1 .                                              
Second proof of upper bound. For any periodic orbit ΓgH with discriminant ≤ D
and associated torus T, the point ι(t) ∈ V defined by (2.2) satisfies ι(t) = Ad(g)ι(h).
By Theorem 2.7, g may be taken to belong to a fixed compact subset of G; therefore
ι(t) belongs to a fixed compact subset of V and has (by definition of discriminant)
denominator ≤ D with respect to the lattice VZ . It follows the number of possibil-
ities for ι(t) is ≪ Ddim V +1 .                                                      
  The lower bound in Proposition 2.9 is closely tied to the notion of packets, as
well as the implicit actions of adelic groups, which will be discussed further in [14].
Proof for the lower bound. Let ΓgH be a periodic orbit, so that gHg −1 = T(R)
for an anisotropic torus T ⊂ G as in Proposition 2.1. The existence of one such
orbit is established in [35, Thm. 2.13] . Then for δ ∈ G(Q), the orbit ΓδgH is
also periodic; moreover, if δ1 , δ2 define distinct classes in Γ\G(Q)/T(Q), the orbits
Γδ1 gH and Γδ2 gH are distinct.
   It suffices, then, to show that there exist “many” elements in Γ\G(Q)/T(Q).
To do this, we shall make some use of adelic language; this is natural, because the
simplest way of even showing that G(Q) has “many” elements is the fact that G(Q)
is a lattice in G(A).
   In the following argument, N0 will denote a sufficiently large integer. If it is
taken sufficiently large (depending only on G, Γ, T) then all the statements of the
form “for p ≥ N0 ” will be valid. LetQ Af be the ring of finite adeles, i.e. Af consists
of the restricted product (xp ) Q  ∈     Qp where xp ∈ Zp for almost all p. Pick an
open compact subgroup Kf = p Kp of G(Af ) containing Γ. It is a theorem [33,
Theorem 5.1] that the “class number” Kf \G(Af )/G(Q) is finite. Pick, therefore, a
  21Of course, this can also be seen directly and elementarily.
16         M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


finite set of representatives ω1 , . . . , ωr for Kf \G(Af )/G(Q). We may assume that
ωj ∈ Kp for all p ≥ N0 .
   Let P be a set containing prime numbers larger than N0 ; for each p ∈ P suppose
we are given gp ∈ G(Qp ) which does not belong to Kp T(Qp ). For each p ∈ P, there
are δp ∈ G(Q), 1 ≤ j(p) ≤ r, kp ∈ Kf so that
                                   gp = kp ωj(p) δp .
We claim the associated cosets Γδp T(Q) are disjoint. For, if we had an equality
Γδp T(Q) = Γδq T(Q), we must in particular, have an equality
                         −1 −1                 −1 −1
                     Kf ωj(p) kp gp T(Q) = Kf ωj(q) kq gq T(Q).
Looking at the “p-component” of this shows that gp ∈ Kp T(Qp ), a contradiction.
   Now let us produce such a collection {gp }. Let K be a field over which T splits.
Thus G also splits over K. Let α be a root of T and uα : Ga → G the corresponding
root subgroup. This morphism of algebraic groups is defined over K. If p ≥ N0 is
prime and we pick an embedding K ֒→ Qp (if one exists), we obtain in an obvious
way an embedding uα : Ga → G over Qp . We note that such an embedding exists
for a positive density of p, by the Chebotarev density theorem.
   We claim that – for any such p that is sufficiently large, say p ≥ N0 – we must
have gp := uα (p−1 ) ∈/ Kp T(Qp ), and moreover the discriminant of the associated
periodic orbit Γδp gH is ≤ c3 pc4 . These two claims together complete the proof of
the lower bound.
   The first claim may be deduced as follows. Suppose that gp ∈ Kp T(Qp ). Then
there exists tp ∈ T(Qp ) so that uα (p−1 ).t−1 p  ∈ Kp . The image of uα defines a
closed subvariety of the affine algebraic variety G/T. This means that there exists a
regular, right T-invariant function fα on the algebraic variety G, with the property
that it extends the function uα (x) 7→ x. For sufficiently large p we would necessarily
have fα (Kp ) ⊂ Zp , contradicting the fact that uα (p−1 ).t−1
                                                             p ∈ Kp .
   The second claim follows from the following fact. There is a constant C > 0 so
that, for all p ≥ N0 and for all K ֒→ Qp , Ad(gp ).(VZ ⊗ Zp ) ⊂ p−C (VZ ⊗ Zp ). Here
VZ is as in the definition of discriminant in Section 2.3. Indeed,
                    Ad(gp )(VZ ⊗ Zp ) = Ad ◦ uα (p−1 )(VZ ⊗ Zp ).
Now Ad ◦ uα defines a morphism of algebraic groups from Ga to GL(V ) defined
over K; choosing a K-basis for V , the different matrix entries of Ad ◦ uα (x) define
a collection of one-variable polynomials in K[x]. It would suffice to take for C the
largest degree of any one of these polynomials.                                    
   Proposition 2.8 and Proposition 2.9 together imply that the number of periodic
H-orbits of volume ≤ R is at most exp(cR) for some c (cf. [32] where the finiteness
of the number of such orbits is established).
   This bound can be improved in the specific examples; see, for example, Corol-
lary 4.2, where it is shown that for X = PGL(n, Z)\ PGL(n, R) the number of
periodic H-orbits of volume ≤ R is bounded by a bound of the form exp(cR1/2 )
which up to the precise value of c is sharp.

                 3. Periodic H-orbits and positive entropy
   Our main aim in this section is to prove positive entropy for limit measures arising
from periodic H-orbits, i.e. Linnik’s Principle in Theorem 1.9. Throughout this
                      DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                          17


section, let G be an R-split algebraic group defined over Q, let Γ be an arithmetic
lattice in G = G(R) (as always commensurable with G(Z)), H be an R-split Cartan
subgroup of G, and h = Lie H.
   For any x ∈ h there is attached a one parameter subgroup a(t) = exp(tx) of
H, and for Haar measure µHaar on Γ\G one can easily show that the metric (or
Kolmogorov-Sinai) entropy of the flow is given by
                                                  X
(3.1)             hµHaar (a(·)) = hµHaar (a(1)) =   max(0, α(x))
                                                     α∈Φ

where Φ denotes the set of roots of G.
Theorem 3.1. Let x ∈ Lie H and a(t) = exp(tx) be a one-parameter subgroup of
H as above, and ρ an arbitrary positive real number. Let Yi = {yi,1 H, . . . , yi,ni H}
be a collection of periodic H-orbits in X = Γ\G and ∆i → ∞ satisfying
    (1) the discriminants of all yi,j H for j = 1, . . . , ni are at most ∆i
    (2) the total volume of all the orbits in Yi is bigger than ∆ρi .
Let µi be the sum of the volume measures on the periodic H-orbits yi,j H in Yi
(1 ≤ j ≤ ni ), divided by the total volume of these orbits (so that µi is a probability
measure). Suppose that
    (3) µi → µ as i → ∞ in the weak∗ topology for some probability measure µ.
Then
(3.2)                          hµ (a(·)) ≥ ρ min |α(x)| /2.
                                              α∈Φ

If, instead of (1) above, one assumes
    (1′ ) the discriminant of all yi,j H for j = 1, . . . , ni is equal to ∆i
then (3.2) can be improved to
(3.2’)                           hµ (a(·)) ≥ ρ min |α(x)| .
                                               α∈Φ

    For concreteness, we consider explicitly the case of G ∼   = SL(n, R), H the group
of the diagonal matrices, x ∈ h the diagonal matrix with entries (n − 1)/2, (n −
3)/2, . . . , −(n − 1)/2, and a(t) the corresponding one parameter subgroup of H. In
this case the roots are α(y) = yi − yj where y ∈ h a diagonal        matrix with entries
y1 , . . . , yn , and hence by (3.1) gives hµHaar (a(·)) = n+1
                                                               
                                                             3  . It follows that in the
notations of Theorem 3.1 we have
                                  ρh      (a(·))
                                  µHaar          under assumption (1)
                                      2(n+1 )
                      hµ (a(·)) ≥ ρhµ 3 (a(·))
                                  Haar           under assumption (1′ ).
                                      (n+1
                                         3 )

Neither of these bounds seem tight, and indeed in some cases a better bounds can
be obtained. In particular, for G = PGL2 one can prove under assumption (1′ )
a sharp estimate hµ ≥ 2ρ. Such a bound (which is far from being trivial, even
in this very simple context), or more precisely a p-adic analog of such a bound,
can be deduced from Linnik’s “basic lemma” in [26], and a simplified and explicit
derivation of this bound will be given in [13].
   We wish to draw attention to assumption (3) in Theorem 3.1. If X = Γ\G is
compact then by passing to a subsequence if necessary this assumption is automat-
ically satisfied. On the other hand, if Γ is not a uniform lattice in G, whether (3) is
18           M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


satisfied or not is a rather interesting issue; e.g. for G = PGLn it is closely related
to analytic properties of Dedekind ζ-functions.
   If one is willing to compromise on the quality of the entropy bound (3.2) or
(3.2′ ), it is possible to relax slightly the assumption that µ(X) = 1, assuming only
that µ(X) > c for some explicit c (which for large n will be extremely close to 1).
We do not give the details as this situation does not seem likely to arise in any
natural context.

3.1. Entropy and bounds on measures of tubes. In this and the next sub-
section we review some well-known facts about entropy in a form which will be
convenient for our purposes and deduce Theorem 3.1 from the following proposi-
tion. Note that the fact that we are dealing with spaces which are not compact
causes minor complication in an otherwise straightforward argument. Moreover,
because the space might not be compact it is necessary to assume that the weak∗
limit is a probability measure.
   Let a(t) denote a R-diagonalizable one parameter subgroup of a semisimple group
G = G(R) as above. Fix some open neighborhood of the identity B ⊂ G. For any
s < t ∈ R+ , denote
                         B (s,t) = a(−s)Ba(s) ∩ a(−t)Ba(t).
Proposition 3.2. Suppose µi is a sequence of a(t)-invariant probability measures
on Γ\G converging in the weak∗ topology to a probability measure µ. Suppose further
that there is a sequence of positive real numbers ti → ∞ so that, for every compact
Ω ⊂ Γ\G, there exists an open neighborhood of the identity B ⊂ G with:
                       n                               o
(3.3)           µi × µi (x, y) ∈ Ω2 : y ∈ xB (−ti ,ti )    < CΩ e−2ηti .

Then the metric entropy of µ with respect to the flow a(t) satisfies hµ (a(t)) ≥ η.
     In particular, we have the following:
                                                                                   w∗
Corollary 3.3. Let µi , µ be a(t)-invariant probability measures on Γ\G with µi −→
µ. Suppose that there is a sequence of positive real numbers ti → ∞ so that, for
every compact Ω ⊂ Γ\G, there exists an open neighborhood of the identity B ⊂ G
with
                               
(3.4)           µi xB (−ti ,ti ) < CΩ′ e−2ηti     for every x ∈ Ω.

Then the metric entropy of the flow a(t) satisfies hµ (a(t)) ≥ η.
Proof of Corollary 3.3 assuming Proposition 3.2. By Fubini,
               n                             o Z                     
(3.5) µi × µi (x, y) ∈ Ω2 : y ∈ xB (−ti ,ti )   =   µi xB (−ti ,ti ) ∩ Ω dµi (x)
                                                           Ω
applying (3.4) we get
                                      Z
                        (3.5) ≤ CΩ′       e−2ηti dµi (x) ≤ CΩ′ e−2ηti
                                      Ω
and hence the condition on µi in Corollary 3.3 implies that in Proposition 3.2. 
   As we will see below the assumption in Theorem 3.1 regarding the total volume
and the information from Proposition 2.4 regarding the discreteness of periodic
orbits are enough to deduce the assumptions to Corollary 3.3.
                     DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                           19


Proof of Theorem 3.1 assuming Proposition 3.2. The idea in words is that the as-
sumption (3.4) to Corollary 3.3 expresses an upper bound on the volume of the
intersection of collections of periodic orbits with small tubes. However, by Propo-
sition 2.3, pieces of closed orbits can never be too close to each other, so, if the
tubes are small enough and the total volume is big enough, a “trivial” bound on
the volume of pieces of periodic orbits is sufficient to obtain (3.4) and so positive
entropy.
   Let BH ⊂ H be a compact neighborhood of the identity and let BR = exp V
where V is a compact neighborhood of zero in the linear hull of the nonzero root
spaces for h acting on g. Then B = BR BH is a neighborhood of the identity e ∈ G.
We are going to prove the assumption to Corollary 3.3 for an arbitrary compact set
Γ\ΓΩ with compact Ω ⊂ G.
   For this, note first that for t ≥ 0
                     B (−t,t) = a(t)BR a(−t) ∩ a(−t)BR a(t) BH .
                                                            

Define κ = minα∈Φ |α(x)|. We may assume a is regular and so κ > 0. There exists
some constant c > 0 such that
                               B (−t,t) ⊂ Bce
                                           G
                                             −κt (e)BH ,


for all t > 0, where BδG (e) denotes a δ-neighbourhood of the identity in G.
   Recall that if g1 , g2 ∈ ΩB give rise to periodic H-orbits of discriminant less than
∆i then d(g1 , g2 ) ≫Ω ∆−1  i   unless g1 NG (H) = g2 NG (H) by Proposition 2.4. Now
set ti = logκ∆i + A for some constant A that depends on B, Ω. By choosing A
sufficiently large, we can achieve that g1 , g2 ∈ gB (−ti ,ti ) with Γg1 , Γg2 ∈ Yi and
g ∈ Ω implies g1 NG (H) = g2 NG (H).
   Therefore, Yi ∩ ΓgB (−ti ,ti ) is contained in at most one periodic NG (H)-orbit
Γgi NG (H) and hence in at most |NG (H)/H| periodic H-orbits. More precisely,
there exists δ = δ(Ω, B) > 0 and x1 , . . . , xJ ∈ Γgi NG (H) with J = |NG (H)/H|
such that
                                                    J
                                                    [
                              Yi ∩ ΓgB (−ti ,ti ) ⊂   xj BδH (e).
                                              j=1
   Since the total volume of Yi with respect to a fixed Haar measure of H is assumed
to be ∆ρi we see that for the normalized measure
                          
          µi ΓgB (−ti ,ti ) ≤ ∆−ρ      µH,Haar (xj BδH (e)) ≪ ∆−ρ
                                   X
                                i                              i  ≪ e−ρκti .
                                    j

This shows (3.4) with η = ρκ
                           2 and the theorem in the case of (1). For (1’) the proof
uses the first case of Proposition 2.4 instead of the second.                        
3.2. Proof of Proposition 3.2. For any set Ω ⊂ Γ\G, we let
                                           T
                   (                                            )
                                      1  X
            ΩM(ǫ) = x ∈ Γ\G : sup              1Ω∁ (xa(−n)) < ǫ
                               T ∈Z+ 2T      n=−T +1
       ∁
with Ω denoting the complement of Ω in Γ\G. Note that for ǫ < 1/2 the above
definition particularly implies that ΩM(ǫ) ⊂ Ω. From the maximal inequality, we
know that for any a(t)-invariant probability measure µ
                              µ(Ω∁M(ǫ) ) ≤ 10ǫ−1 µ(Ω∁ ).
20           M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


     For any partition P of Γ\G we let
                                                    _
                                       P (s,t) =             Pa(n).
                                                   s≤n≤t

All our partitions will be implicitly assumed to be finite. We will use [x]P to denote
the unique element of P containing the point x. For any finite partition P, we let
Hµ (P) denotes its entropy, i.e.
                                         X
(3.6)                       Hµ (P) = −      µ(P ) log µ(P ).
                                                P ∈P
   We shall say that the partition P is µ-regular if for every P ∈ P the boundary
of P has µ measure zero.
   We now fix a partition P and a compact set Ω ⊂ Γ\G which will be used for the
remainder of this section. First, we let Ω be a compact set so that the µ measure
                                                     w∗
of the interior of Ω is > 1 − ǫ2 /200. Then since µi −→ µ, for all sufficiently large i
(3.7)               µi (Ω) > 1 − ǫ2 /100 and µi (ΩM(ǫ) ) > 1 − ǫ/10.
  Let B1 be a relatively compact symmetric open neighborhood of the identity in
G so that:
   (1) B12 ⊂ B with B a neighborhood of the identity satisfying our assumption
       (3.3)
   (2) for any x ∈ Ω,
                                                                      (0,1)
                               x.B1 ∩ xa(−1)B1 a(1) = xB1                     .
We now take P to be any (finite) µ-regular partition so that for every x ∈ Ω the
element [x]P ⊂ xB1 (note that the existence of such partitions is immediate).
Lemma 3.4. Without loss of generality we can choose B1 so that for some C and
every n ∈ Z+
                 (0,n)           (0,n+1)
(3.8)        B1          ⊂ Fn · B1              for some Fn ⊂ G with |Fn | ≤ C
              (−n,0)             (−n−1,0)
(3.9)       B1           ⊂ Fn · B1                 for some Fn ⊂ G with |Fn | ≤ C.
Proof. We will only prove L  (3.8); the proof of (3.9) is similar. Let g be the Lie
algebra of G, and let g =      λ gλ be the decomposition of g into eigenspaces for
Ad(a(t)). The Riemannian metric defined earlier on G gives us a EuclideanP norm
on g. So, for any δ let Bλ (δ) = {g ∈ gλ : kgk < δ}. We take B1 = exp( λ Bλ (δ))
where δ is chosen to be sufficiently
                           P         small so that B12 ⊂ B and so that the map exp
is a diffeomorphism from λ Bλ (δ) onto its image. Clearly,
                                          X                 
                       a(t)B1 a(−t) = exp       Bλ (exp(tλ)δ)
                                                         λ
                                 X                                                
                   (s,t)
                                                                X
                  B1     = exp             Bλ (exp(sλ)δ) +            Bλ (exp(tλ)δ) .
                                     λ≥0                        λ<0
                                                              P
Assuming δ is sufficiently small, for every g ∈ λ Bλ (δ) and n > 0 we have:
                        X               X                        
            exp(g) exp       Bλ (δ/2) ×      Bλ (exp((n + 1)λ)δ/2)
                               λ≥0                 λ<0
                                   X          X                    
                          ⊂ exp g +   Bλ (δ) ×   Bλ (exp((n + 1)λ)δ) ;
                                        λ≥0              λ<0
                         DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                                  21


This follows easily, e.g. the maps (X, Y ) 7→ exp(X+Y ) and (X, Y ) 7→ exp(X) exp(Y )
from g × g to GP  have the sameP  derivative at 0.
   Since clearly λ≥0 Bλ (δ) × λ<0 Bλ (exp(nλ)δ) can be covered by a fixed finite
number, say C, of translates of
                       X              X
                           Bλ (δ/2) ×     Bλ (exp((n + 1)λ)δ/2),
                          λ≥0                  λ<0

with C independent of n, this lemma follows.                                                    
  Using Lemma 3.4, one easily proves the following using induction: for integers
k ≤ 0 ≤ m and x ∈ Ω, if
                           n                         o
                        n = k ≤ i ≤ m : xa(−i) ∈ Ω∁
                            (k,m)
then [x]P(k,m) ⊂ Fx · B1              for some Fx ⊂ Γ\G satisfying |F | ≤ C n . In particular,
we have the following:
Corollary 3.5. For any x ∈ ΩM(ǫ) and t ∈ R+ there is a finite subset Fx,t ⊂ Γ\G
with log |Fx,t | ≪ ǫt so that
                                                                      (−t,t)
                                      [x]P (−t,t) ⊂ Fx,t · B1                  .
Lemma 3.6. For every sufficiently large i
                       Hµi (P (−ti ,ti ) ) ≥ µi (ΩM(ǫ) )(2η − cǫ)ti + OΩ (1),
with c independent of Ω, ǫ, i.
Proof. We will first calculate the entropy of P (−ti ,ti ) with respect to the measure
µ′i = µi |ΩM (ǫ) , i.e. the measure
                                                  1
                                µ′i (A) =                µi (A ∩ ΩM(ǫ) ).
                                             µi (ΩM(ǫ) )
Let {P1 , . . . , PN } = P (−ti ,ti ) , and let p′n = µ′i (Pn ). By Corollary 3.5, for every Pn
intersecting ΩM(ǫ) (in particular every Pn with p′n > 0), one has that
                                                      M
                                                      [n
                                             Pn =             Qnm
                                                      m=1
                                                                  (−t ,t )
with the Qnm disjoint, each Qnm ⊂ xnm B1 i i for some xnm ∈PΓ\G, and
       cǫti         ′          ′                                      ′
Pn <′ e . ′Write qnm = µi (Qnm ), and let Q = {Qnm }. Then since n pn = 1,
M
  m qnm = pn , by convexity of log
                                         X                     X 2
                Hµ′i (P (−ti ,ti ) ) = −   p′n log p′n ≥ − log( p′n )
                                                 n                                  i
and finally
                                  "                  #2        "                    #
                           2                                                  ′ 2
                  X              X X                          X X
                                               ′
                        p′n =                 qnm         ≤                  qnm        |Mn |
                   n              n      m                    n         m
                                                                  Z
                                                  2
                                        X
                             ≤ ecǫti          ′
                                             qnm = ecǫti               µ′i ([x]Q )dµ′i (x)
                                    Znm
                             ≤ ecǫti µ′i (xB (−ti ,ti ) )dµ′i (x) ≪Ω ecǫti −2ηti
22              M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


by Cauchy-Schwarz, the construction of Q, and the assumption (3.4). It follows
that
                            Hµ′i (P (−ti ,ti ) ) ≥ (2η − cǫ)ti + OΩ (1).
Let pn = µ(Pn ). Then
                             X                      X
     Hµi (P (−ti ,ti ) ) = −      pn log pn ≥ −         pn log p′n
                                      n                     n
                                                 X
                                ≥ −µi (ΩM(ǫ) )        p′n log p′n
                                                  n

                                = µi (ΩM(ǫ) )Hµ′i (P (−ti ,ti ) ) ≥ µi (ΩM(ǫ) )(2η − cǫ)ti + OΩ (1).
                                                                                                        
Proof of Proposition 3.2. By Lemma 3.6, we have, for sufficiently large i:
          Hµi (P (−ti ,ti ) ) ≥ µi (ΩM(ǫ) )(2η − cǫ)ti + OΩ (1) ≥ (1 − ǫ)(2η − cǫ)ti
and using subadditivity of Hµi and invariance of µi under a(t) it follows that for
any n
                                    ⌊ti /n⌋
                                     X
     Hµi (P   (−ti ,ti )
                           )≤                  Hµi (P (−kn,−(k+1)n ) = (2 ⌊ti /n⌋ + 2)Hµi (P (0,n) ).
                                k=−⌊ti /n⌋−1

Since P is µ regular, for any fixed n we have Hµi (P (0,n) ) → Hµ (P (0,n) ). Thus
                                 Hµi (P (−ti ,ti ) )
                 Hµ (P (0,n) ) ≥ lim sup
                          i→∞      2 ⌊ti /n⌋ + 2
                                           2(η − cǫ)ti
                      ≥ (1 − ǫ) lim sup                = (1 − ǫ)(η − cǫ)n.
                                  i→∞ 2 ⌊ti /n⌋ + 2
Dividing both sides by n and taking the limit as first n → ∞ and then ǫ → 0 gives
the proposition.                                                               

       4. The action of H on quotients of central simple algebras
   This section discusses further the case when G arises from the multiplicative
group of an R-split central algebra (e.g., G = PGLn !)
   In Section 4.1, we explicate the correspondence of Section 2, and discuss (for the
only time in this paper) the notion of packet. This notion will be further developed
in [14].
   In Section 4.2, we present and refine some existing theorems about the dynamics
of the Cartan action in this setting. In the setting of G = PGL3 this isolation
theorem was proved (in different language) by Cassels and Swinnerton-Dyer.
4.1. Central simple algebras and PGLn .
4.1.1. Central simple algebras: notation. Let DQ be a central simple algebra over
Q of rank n, i.e. DQ ⊗Q Q is isomorphic to Mn (Q) as an algebra. We assume that
DQ is split over R, that is to say, DQ ⊗Q R is isomorphic to Mn (R).
                                      ×
   Let G be the algebraic group “P DQ   ” associated to the projective group of units
in DQ . The Lie algebra g of G is identified with the quotient of DQ by its center,
the bracket operation being [x, y] := xy − yx.
   Let OD be an order inside DQ , i.e. a Z-module of rank n2 containing 1 and
closed under multiplication. Choose a basis {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn2 } for OD ; the adjoint
                       DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                                  23


action of DQ w.r.t. this basis yields an embedding G → GLn2 . The intersection
                                                     ×
G(Q)∩GLn2 (Z) is commensurable with the image of OD     in G(Q); in particular,the
             ×
image Γ of OD inside G = G(R) is an arithmetic lattice. For gZ we take the image
of OD in g, and finally for B the form
                        B : (X, Y ) → tr(1) tr(XY ) − tr(X) tr(Y ),
where tr(X) is the trace of “left multiplication by X on DQ ”. This defines a bilinear
form on DQ which descends to g. With these choices it is easy to check that our
earlier assumptions hold true.
   Furthermore, we fix a maximal commutative totally real semisimple subalgebra
EH of DQ ⊗ R; then EH is isomorphic to Rn . The centralizer of EH defines a
Cartan subgroup H ⊂ G.
4.1.2. Parameterization of closed orbits; lower and upper bounds for volumes. We
shall explicate the parameterization of closed orbits in this particular case. Proofs
will be given in §4.1.3.
   Let O be a totally real order, i.e. a ring which is a finite free Z-module and so
that O ⊗ Q is a totally real number field. Let σ1 , . . . , σn : O ⊗ Q → R be the
different real embeddings. By means of θ := (σ1 , . . . , σn ) we may regard O as a
lattice in Rn ; by means of
                               η : x 7→ (log |σ1 |, . . . , log |σn |)
                  ×
we may map O (the P       group of invertible elements in O) onto a lattice in Rn−1 =
                       n
{(x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ R :   i xi }. The latter result is Dirichlet’s unit theorem. We
define the discriminant and regulator:
(4.1)      discriminant O := vol(Rn /θ(O))2 , regulator O := vol(Rn−1 /η(O × ))
Proposition 4.1 (Parameterization of periodic orbits for central simple algebras.).
                                            ×
In the case of the algebraic group G = P DQ    defined by a central simple algebra DQ ,
we have bijections between:
    (1’) periodic H-orbits on Γ\G.
    (2’) Γ-orbits on pairs (E, ϕ) where E is a subfield of DQ of degree n, and ϕ :
         E ⊗R → EH is an algebra isomorphism. Here γ maps (E, ϕ) to (γEγ −1 , ϕ◦
         AdD (γ −1 )). Here AdD (γ −1 ) denotes the conjugation of elements of DQ by
         γ −1 .
The bijection associates to the pair (E, ϕ) the periodic orbit ΓgH, where g ∈ G has
the property that the conjugation h → ghg −1 maps EH to E and coincides with
ϕ−1 .
   The discriminant of the orbit is a constant multiple of the discriminant of the
order E ∩ OD ; the volume of the orbit is a constant multiple of the regulator of OD .
  Using this correspondence, we can obtain versions of some of the results from
Section 2 with better exponents.
Corollary 4.2. Notations as in the Proposition, we have:
   (i) The total volume of all orbits of discriminant D is ≫ǫ D1/2−ε and the vol-
       ume of any single periodic orbit of discriminant D satisfies V ≪ǫ D1/2+ε .22
   22This part of the Corollary will not be proved in this paper, but in [14]. However, it is not
used anywhere else in the present paper.
24         M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


     (ii) Let n be prime. The volume V of any periodic orbit of discriminant D
          satisfies V ≫ (log D)n−1 .
   We expect that the exponents of Corollary 4.2 cannot be improved.
   To be even more concrete, we specialize further to the case of the split matrix
algebra: take D = Mn (Q) and OD = Mn (Z), the algebra of n by n matrices. In
that case G = PGLn , G = PGLn (R), Γ = PGLn (Z). Take EH to be the diagonal
subalgebra, thus H is the diagonal torus.
   Let K be a totally real field of degree n.
Definition 4.3. By a lattice in K we shall simply mean a Z-submodule of K of
rank n. Two lattices L1 , L2 ⊂ K are called K-equivalent (or simply equivalent)
if there is k ∈ K × so that k.L1 = L2 . Attached to any lattice L we have the
associated order OL := {λ ∈ K : λL ⊂ L}. Then K-equivalent lattices have the
same associated order.
Corollary 4.4. There is a bijection between:
   (1”) periodic H-orbits on PGLn (Z)\ PGLn (R).
   (2”) Triples (K, L, θ) of a totally real number field, a K-equivalence class of
        lattices in K, and an algebra isomorphism θ : K ⊗ R → Rn .
Here the triples of (2”) are considered up to isomorphism in the evident sense.
   The discriminant of the orbit is a constant multiple of the discriminant of the
order OL associated to L, and the volume of the orbit is a constant multiple of the
regulator of OL .
    If one identifies PGLn (Z)\ PGLn (R) with homothety classes of lattices in Rn ,
the bijection assigns to (K, [L], θ) the H-orbit of the homothety class of the lattice
θ(L). Here L ∈ [L] is arbitrary.
    It is often convenient to group the data of [(2”)] by the order OL . For instance,
in the case when OL is a maximal order, the associated equivalence classes [L] are
parameterized by the class group of OL . Thus, approximately speaking, periodic
H-orbits on PGLn (Z)\ PGLn (R) are parameterized by an order in a totally real
field, together with an ideal class.
Remark 4.5. There is a natural weaker equivalence relation on lattices L ⊂ K.
Namely, we say that L, L′ are locally equivalent if, for every prime p, there exists
λ ∈ (K ⊗ Qp )× so that (L ⊗ Qp ) = λ(L′ ⊗ Qp ). Via the parameterization above,
this groups the periodic orbits into finite equivalence classes with the following
properties:
    (1) Periodic orbits in the same equivalence class have the same volume and
        same stabilizer in H.
    (2) Each equivalence class has total volume V satisfying
                              D1/2−ǫ ≪ǫ V ≪ D1/2+ǫ
         where D is the common discriminant.
     (3) The set of periodic orbits in each equivalence class is acted on (simply
         transitively) by a suitable class group.
This type of grouping can be done (after choosing some auxiliary data) in a much
more general setting; this is the phenomena of packets that will be discussed further
in [14].
                      DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                              25


  Again, in this special context we can obtain versions of some results of Section 2
with sharp exponents:
Corollary 4.6. For the H-action on PGLn (Z)\ PGLn (R):
   (i) There is c > 0 so that any bounded H-orbit of discriminant D is contained
       in Ω(cD1/2 ); the exponent is sharp.
  (ii) If n is prime, the number N (V ) of periodic H-orbits on PGLn (Z)\ PGLn (R)
       of volume ≤ V satisfies
                          V 1/(n−1) ≪ log N (V ) ≪ V 1/(n−1) .
   The behavior of (ii) when n is not prime is heavily influenced by the existence
of fields with intermediate subfields. Since the main aim of the corollary is simply
to contrast with the case of n = 2, when one has the asymptotic log N (V ) ∼ V , we
do not attempt to analyze the general case.

4.1.3. Proofs. Let G be as in Section 4.1.1. Then maximal torii in G are in bijection
with degree n subfields of DQ : to each maximal torus T ⊂ G one associates the
preimage of its Lie algebra, under the natural map DQ → g.

Proof. (of Prop. 4.1.) The first part of the Proposition is a consequence of
Lemma 2.1, taking into account the above remark and the Skolem-Noether the-
orem [18, Thm. IX.6.7] (which assures that there exists a g ∈ G/H such that
e 7→ g −1 eg coincides with ϕ : E ⊗ R → EH ). For the assertion concerning discrimi-
nant, let {ē1 , . . . , ēn−1 } be a Z-basis for the image of E ∩ OD in the quotient space
E/Q; lift them to e1 , . . . , en−1 ∈ E ∩ OD . Then e0 = 1, e1 , . . . , en−1 is a basis for
E ∩ OD . The discriminant D of the periodic orbit attached to (E, gH) is
              det{B(ēi , ēj )} = det{n tr(ei ej ) − tr(ei ) tr(ej )}1≤i,j≤n−1 .
On the other hand,
disc(E ∩ OD ) = det{tr(ei ej )}0≤i,j≤n−1 = n det{tr(ei ej ) − tr(ei ) tr(ej )/n}1≤i,j≤n−1
From this it follows that D = nn−2 disc(E ∩ OD ).                                        

Proof. (of Corollary 4.2.)
   (1) The proof of (i) is most natural after the introduction of packets. We defer
        it to a later paper. It is not necessary for the proof or statement of any
        other result in this paper.
   (2) For the proof of (ii), the assertion V ≫ (log D)n−1 , we prove the corre-
        sponding fact about orders. If O is a totally real order of discriminant D
        and regulator V (as in (4.1)), we will show that V ≫ (log D)n−1 .
           Let k · k be the sup norm on Rn defined by k(x1 , . . . , xn )k = maxi |xi |.
                                                                              1
        We claim that, for any λ ∈ O, λ ∈      / Z, we have kθ(λ)k ≫ D n(n−1) . In
        fact, kθ(λi )k = kθ(λ)ki and, because n was prime, 1, λ, . . . , λn−1 form a
        Z-basis for the order Z[λ] ⊆ O. Therefore, the covolume of O is at most
        Ckθ(λ)kn(n−1)/2 , where C depends only on n. Because the covolume of O
        is precisely D1/2 , the claim follows.
           Therefore, every nonzero vector in η(O × ) has length ≫n log D. Now
        η(O × ) has rank n−1, so it must have covolume ≫n (log D)n−1 , as required.
                                                                                    
26          M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


Proof. (of Corollary 4.4). It follows from Proposition 4.1: periodic H-orbits are in
bijection with Γ-orbits on pairs (K, θ), where K ⊂ Mn (Q) is a totally real field.
Given such a pair, we associate to it the triple (K, [L], θ). Here L is obtained in
the following way: fix a nonzero a ∈ Qn and let (x) = xa for x ∈ K. Now set
L = −1 (Zn ).
   Conversely, given a triple (K, [L], θ), choose a basis λ1 , . . . , λn for L to obtain an
embedding ι : K → Mn (Q) with the property that
                        K ∩ Mn (Z) = OL = {λ ∈ L : λL ⊂ L}.
  We thereby obtain a pair (ι(K), θ) as in the previous section, and moreover the
Γ-orbit of this pair is independent of the choice of basis.                    
Proof. (of Corollary 4.6) (i) Let (K, [L], θ) be data parameterizing a periodic orbit;
and let L ⊂ K be any lattice in K in the class [L]. If α ∈ L, then also αOL ⊂ L;
here OL is the order associated to L, as in Corollary 4.4. Therefore θ(α).θ(OL ) ⊂
θ(L). Let D be the discriminant of OL , and ν the volume ofQRn /θ(L). Computing
covolumes, this shows for any (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ θ(L), we have i |xi |D1/2 ≥ ν.
   Writing k(x1 , . . . , xn )k = maxi |xi |, we can rephrase in the following way: for
any x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ H.θ(L), kxkn D1/2 ≥ ν. It follows from this and lattice
reduction that any lattice θ(L′ ) ∈ H.θ(L) has a reduced basis v1 , . . . , vn with
                                                                Y
            ν 1/n D−1/(2n) ≪ kv1 k ≪ kv2 k ≪ · · · ≪ kvn k;        kvi k ≍ ν
                                                                  i
where the implicit constants in ≪ depend only on n. But this means also that
kvn k ≪ ν 1/n D(n−1)/(2n) .
   Now let ΓgH belong to the associated periodic orbit. Then g −1 Mn (Z)g consists
of endomorphisms X ∈ Mn (R) that preserve θ(L′ ), for some L′ ∈ H.L. If X ∈
Mn (R) preserves θ(L′ ) and is nonzero, there exists 1 ≤ i ≤ n so that vi X 6= 0. But
kvi k ≪ ν 1/n D(n−1)/(2n) and kvi Xk ≫ ν 1/n D−1/(2n) . So the operator norm of X
w.r.t. k·k is ≫ D−1/2 . This implies that ΓgH ∈ Ω(cD1/2 ) for suitable c = c(n) > 0,
in the notation of (2.1).
   (ii) Let n be prime; we will show that the number N (V ) of periodic orbits of
volume ≤ V satisfies V 1/(n−1) ≪ log N (V ) ≪ V 1/(n−1) .
   The upper bound follows from the bound V ≫ (log D)n−1 , established in Corol-
lary 4.2, as well as Proposition 2.9.
   The lower bound follows from Corollary 4.4 and the following fact, also used in
Section 7: There exists an > 0 and ≫ X an totally real fields K with disc(K) ≤ X,
each has a maximal order OK satisfying
                     regulator(OK ) ≪ (log discriminant(OK ))n−1
and the implicit constants depends only on n. See [7, §3, Prop. 1].                      
4.2. Measure classification and isolation theorems for central simple al-
gebras. Let G = G(R) be a real algebraic group, Γ < G a lattice and H a maximal
R-split torus. The dynamics of H is drastically different if dim H = 1 or dim H > 1,
and this is reflected by the behavior of the periodic H-orbits.
   We study in detail the case G = SL(2) in §7.1. In this case, and in all cases
dim H = 1, the behavior of individual periodic H-orbits in Γ\G is quite arbitrary.
When dim H ≥ 2 the situation changes dramatically. First consider the case of
PGLn (Z)\ PGLn (R). Conjecturally, the following is expected to hold:
                     DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                            27


Conjecture 4.7. Let H be the diagonal split Cartan subgroup in PGLn (R) for
n ≥ 3 and consider its right action on PGLn (Z)\ PGLn (R).
   (1) Every ergodic H-invariant probability measure is algebraic, i.e. coincides
       with the (L-invariant) volume measure of a closed L-orbit for some subgroup
       H ≤ L ≤ PGLn (R).
   (2) Every bounded H-orbit is periodic.
   (3) For every compact Ω ⊂ PGLn (Z)\ PGLn (R) there are only finitely many
       periodic orbits that are contained in Ω.
    Part (1) of this conjecture is a special case of more general conjectures by Fursten-
berg (unpublished), Katok and Spatzier [20], and Margulis [30], and in particular
follows from [30, Conj. 2](properly interpreted); see [12] for more details and more
general conjectures).
    Part (2) of this conjecture can be traced back to Cassels and Swinnerton-Dyer
[5], but in the form given here is due to Margulis (see e.g. [27]). It would follow
from part (1); this can be shown quite readily using the techniques of [5]. We show
below how to deduce part (2) from part (1) using a more refined and recent result.
    The same techniques also shows that part (3) of the conjecture follows from part
(2). This part of the conjecture has also been highlighted by Margulis (see e.g. [16,
Prob. 30]).
    One of the important results proved in [5] is an isolation theorem: given any
periodic H orbit in X = PGLn (Z)\ PGLn (R), and any compact subset Ω ⊂ X, for
any x ∈ X sufficiently close but not on this periodic H orbit, the orbit xH will
intersect the complement of Ω. This has been strengthened by E. L. and B. Weiss
[25] for PGLn (Z) and generalized by G. Tomanov to the split central simple algebra
case [45].
    Here will need the following slight variant of these results:
Theorem 4.8. Let notation be as in Section 4.1.1, so that Γ is a lattice in G =
PGLn (R) associated to a central simple algebra. Let Y ⊆ X := Γ\G be a closed
H-invariant set. Assume that Y contains a closed orbit yL for a reductive group
L ≤ G such that
    (1) H ≤ L,
    (2) yL has a finite L-invariant volume, and
    (3) Y \ (yL) contains yL.
Then there exists a strictly bigger reductive M > L such that yM is closed, has finite
M -invariant volume, and yM ⊆ Y . Moreover, if DQ = Mn (Q) so that G = PGLn ,
then Y cannot be compact.
   The difference between [25, 45] and Theorem 4.8 is that in [25, 45] the set Y is
assumed to be of the form Y = xH for some x ∈ Γ\G (in which case assumption
(3) is automatic unless Y = yL).
   We also remark that, if n is prime, the only possible L as in the statement of
the Theorem are L = H and L = G. The preimage of the Lie algebra of L in
DQ is actually a semisimple algebra (this statement may be verified over R; now,
note that all reductive subgroups of PGLn (R) that contain a Cartan subgroup are,
in fact, Levi subgroups). So the preimage of the Lie algebra of yLy −1 in DQ is a
semisimple subalgebra l ⊂ DQ . In order that y.L have finite invariant measure, the
group L should not have any Q-characters; this means that l must be be a simple
Q-algebra; it has dimension e2 over its center, some number field E. Then l ⊗ C is a
28         M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


sum of [E : Q] copies of Me (C); every irreducible representation of it has dimension
e, so e|n2 . Since n is prime, this forces e = 1 and l = E, or e = n and l = DQ . In
the former case, L = H; in the latter case, L = G.
Proof of Theorem 4.8. We identify G ∼       = PGLn (R) and take H to be the group of
diagonal n × n matrices (with proportional matrices identified). For a1 , . . . , an we
let diag(a1 , . . . , an ) denote the diagonal matrix with entries a1 , . . . , an .
   The proof of [25, Thm. 1.1] given in [25, pp. 1490–1492] actually proves Theo-
rem 4.8, not just for central simple algebras but for any Γ < PGLn (R), provided
the following conditions are satisfied:
      • The set Y contains a periodic H-orbit Γg0 H;
      • the orbit of Γg0 with respect to each of the R-subtori
                       Hij = {diag(a1 , . . . , an ) ∈ H : ai = aj }
          is not closed.
   By [35, Thm. 2.13] the orbit yL contains a periodic H-orbit Γg0 H. (In [35]
the group is actually assumed to be semisimple. However, L is the product of its
center and the semisimple commutator and the same holds up to finite index for
its arithmetic lattice. Therefore, the center of L must have compact orbit by the
finite volume assumption.)
   By Proposition 4.1 and the assumption that H is R-split the periodic orbit Γg0 H
corresponds to a totally real number field K ⊂ D of degree n. Now consider two
indices 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n and the R-subtorus Hij as above. Then Γ ∩ g0 Hij g0−1 = {ξ ∈
        ×
K ∩ OD     : φ(ξ)i = φ(ξ)j } where φ : K → Rn is the algebra homomorphism induced
by conjugation by g0 as in Lemma 4.1. Since φ(ξ)k for k = 1, . . . , n are precisely
the various Galois embeddings of ξ into R and at least two of these give the same
value, ξ cannot generate K and so for any k = 1, . . . , n there is a second index ℓ
with φ(ξ)k = φ(ξ)ℓ . In particular, Γ ∩ g0 Hij g0−1 cannot be a lattice in g0 Hij g0−1
since n ≥ 3. This establishes the second assumption above.                          
   Using Theorem 4.8 it is easy to prove that (1) implies (2) and (2) implies (3) in
Conjecture 4.7.
   Indeed,suppose (1) in Conjecture 4.7 holds and let PGLn (Z)g0 H be a non-
periodic orbit with compact closure Y . Then the restriction of the H-action on
Y has an H-invariant and ergodic probability measure µ which has to be algebraic
by our assumption, i.e. µ is the finite L-invariant volume on a closed L-orbit for
some group L < G. Since H ≤ L it follows that L is reductive. By Theorem 4.8 it
follows that Y cannot be compact — a contradiction.
   Suppose (2) holds and there are contrary to (3) infinitely many periodic H-orbits
within a particular compact set Ω. Let Y be the closure of the union of a sequence
of different periodic orbits Γgi H in Ω. Since Ω is compact there exists a limit point
x to a sequence xi ∈ Γgi H. Clearly xH ⊂ Ω. By our assumption x has itself a
compact orbit. Therefore, the assumption to Theorem 4.8 is satisfied with L = H
which gives a contradiction to Y being a compact invariant set.
   The best known results towards Conjecture 4.7.(1) are under an additional as-
sumption, namely positive entropy. Also note that this conjecture is related to
another open question by Furstenberg: What are the probability measures on the
circle group R/Z invariant under multiplication by 2 and 3? The best known result
there is Rudolph’s theorem [41] saying that an ergodic such measure with positive
                      DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                               29


entropy must be the Lebesgue measure. Analogues in higher dimensions and homo-
geneous spaces were first obtained by Katok and Spatzier [20, 21] under additional
assumptions, see also [19]. More recently, two methods were developed [9, 10], [24]
for the homogeneous case and together they were sufficient to show that for the
R-split Cartan action on SL(n, Z)\ SL(n, R) positive entropy for some element is
sufficient to deduce that the measure is the volume measure of the homogeneous
space [11, Cor. 1.4].
   For our purposes, we would like to consider more generally any lattice attached
to an order in a central simple algebras as above and not just the special case of
SL(n, Z). This extension (which was suggested to us by Silberman and Tomanov)
does not pose additional technical difficulties, and we present it below. Note that
examples due to M. Rees [39] show that the theorem below as stated is false for a
general lattice Γ even if G = PGL3 (R).
Theorem 4.9. Let notation be as in Section 4.1.1, so that Γ is a lattice in G =
PGLn (R) associated to a central simple algebra. Suppose µ is an H-invariant and
ergodic probability measure on X = Γ\G such that the metric entropy hµ (a) with
respect to µ is positive for some element a ∈ H. Then there exists a reductive
L ≤ G such that µ is the L-invariant volume form on a single periodic L-orbit.
   We are following the scheme of proof of [11, Thm. 1.3] which uses as the main tool
the more general result [11, Thm. 2.1] about the structure of conditional measures.
We refer to [24] or [11, Sec. 2.1] for the basic theory of conditional measures on
foliations. We only recall that for every root of PGLn (R), or more concretely every
pair of indices 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n with i 6= j, there exists a system of conditional measures
µij
  x for almost every x ∈ X defined on the corresponding unipotent subgroup Uij .
Positive entropy means precisely that one such system is nontrivial, i.e. for some
pair i, j the conditional measures µij   x are not just supported on the identity of Uij . If
the conditional measures µij  x equal     the Haar measure of Uij (again for almost every
x), then µ is in fact invariant under Uij . Since the dynamics of the unipotent Uij
is much better understood, this situation is desirable. Towards that [11, Thm. 2.1]
says that for any i, j one of the following three possibilities take place:
      (i) The conditional measures µij               ji
                                           x and µx are trivial a.e.
     (ii) The conditional measures µij    x   and  µji
                                                    x are Haar a.e., and µ is invariant under
          left multiplication with elements of Lij = hUij , Uji i.
    (iii) Let A′ij = {diag(s1 , . . . , sn ) : s ∈ (R× )n with si = sj }. Then a.e. ergodic
          component of µ with respect to A′ij is supported on a single C(Lij )-orbit,
          where C(Lij ) = {g : gh = hg for all h ∈ Lij } is the centralizer of Lij .
Lemma 4.10. For X = Γ\ PGLn (R) as in Theorem 4.9 case (iii) of the above is
impossible.
Proof. In [11, Thm. 5.1] it has been shown for G = SLn (R) that in case (iii) there
exists an element γ ∈ Γ with the following properties:
    (1) diagonalizable over R,
    (2) ±1 is not an eigenvalue of γ, and
    (3) all eigenvalues of γ are simple except precisely one which has multiplicity
        two.
Note that by rescaling its elements a lattice in PGLn (R) gives rise to a lattice in
SLn (R). The resulting quotients are isomorphic unless n is even and Γ contains
30          M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


elements of negative determinant in which case we get a double cover. Because
of this we can use the above result also for G = PGLn (R), for this we define the
eigenvalue of γ ∈ PGLn (R) as the eigenvalue of the matrix after normalizing the
determinant to be ±1.
   Since DQ ⊗ R ∼ = Mn (R) the eigenvalues of left multiplication by γ ∈ OD      ×
                                                                                   on DQ
are precisely the eigenvalues of γ when considered as a matrix in GLn (R), and the
multiplicity on D is precisely n times the multiplicity in the matrix. The char-
acteristic polynomial
                 Qn p(t) of left multiplication by γ on D therefore factorizes as
p(t) = (t − ξ)2n i=3 (t − ξi )n where ξ, ξ3 , . . . , ξn are the pairwise different eigen-
values of γ. Since γ ∈ O × , the polynomial p(t) has integer coefficients and trailing
coefficient ±1. If ξ 6∈ Q, then a Galois conjugate of ξ must be a root of p(t) of the
same multiplicity which is impossible by (3). Therefore, ξ ∈ Q which forces ξ = ±1
— a contradiction to (2).                                                               

Proof of Theorem 4.9. As explained before our assumption of positive entropy trans-
lates to the nontriviality of some conditional measures, i.e. there are pairs of indices
i, j for which (i) above fails. By the above lemma (iii) can never hold, so µ is in-
variant under Lij . Let L be the subgroup generated by all the unipotent subgroups
Uij under which µ is invariant. Clearly L is normalized by H, and in fact we can
                                             Qℓ
reorder the indices such that L equals i=1 SLmi (R) embedded into PGLn (R) as
                                               Pℓ
block matrices. We will show below that i=1 mi = n.
    By [29, Theorems (a) and (b)], applied to µ and the group HL, we know that
there is some L̃ ≥ L which is normalized by H so that almost every L-ergodic
component of µ is the L̃-invariant measure on a closed L̃ orbit. In particular µ is
L̃-invariant, which unless L̃ ≤ HL contradicts the definition of L since otherwise
L̃ contains further unipotent subgroups which preserve µ. Let now x = Γg have
a closed L̃-orbit xL̃ of finite volume. Then ΛL̃ = g L̃g −1 ∩ Γ is a lattice in g L̃g −1 ,
and so the latter is defined over Q. Therefore, the same is true for the semi-simple
gLg −1 = [g L̃g −1 , g L̃g −1 ], ΛL = gLg −1 ∩ Γ is a lattice in gLg −1 , and xL is closed
with finite volume. However, this implies L̃ = L.
    Moreover, by [29, Theorems (a) and (b)] µ is supported by a single orbit of the
normalizer NG (L). If in addition ℓi=1 mi = n, then NG (L) = HL and µ must
                                        P
be the unique HL-invariant measure on the HL-orbit. Since HL is reductive, this
would prove the theorem.
                 Pℓ                            −1
    So suppose       i=1 mi < n. Since gLg         is a Q-group, so are the normalizer
NG (gLg ) and its center Z = C(NG (gLg −1 )). Here g −1 Zg < H consists of all
          −1

diagonal matrices for which all entries in a block corresponding to one of the factors
of L are equal to all other entries in the same block, and for which all remaining
entries are also equal. Moreover, if L′ , Z < D× denotes the algebraic group over
Q corresponding to gLg −1 and Z, then the Lie algebra v of L′ Z is a Q-subspace
of DQ . Going back to GLn (R) and the block matrix description of all of the above
groups, it is easy to see that v is invariant under left multiplication by Z ⊂ D× .
The determinant of this representation defines a Q-character of Z. We claim that
this determinant is as a character linearly independent from the norm character
(defined by the left multiplication on DQ as a representation). However, this again
can be easily seen from the block matrix description: the entries corresponding to
the factors of L are used in higher powers than the remaining ones. Therefore,
Z has Q-rank at least two — modulo Z× this shows that Z has Q-rank at least
                       DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                                  31


one. If h ∈ g −1 Zg is such that the value of the Q-character is bigger than one,
then it follows that hj .x → ∞ for j → ∞ for all points in the NG (L)-orbit (where
the divergence to infinity is understood within the NG (L)-orbit). This contradicts
Poincaré recurrence, and so proves the theorem.                                 

     5. Density and distribution of periodic orbits in higher rank
   In this section we employ the tools developed in §3 and §4 to prove statements
about periodic orbits in Γ\G with Γ a lattice associated to an order in a degree n
central simple division algebra, split over R, in G ∼
                                                    = PGLn (R).
   We first use Theorem 3.1 to give a general, if somewhat messy, theorem regard-
ing the distribution of periodic H-orbits. Note that if Γ\G is noncompact, it is
also a conditional result. Later in this section we will deduced from this theorem
somewhat cleaner results regarding density properties of these periodic orbits.
Theorem 5.1. Let Γ be a lattice in G ∼         = PGLn (R) obtained from an order in a
central simple algebra of degree n, split over R. Let ρ > 0 be arbitrary. Let Yi =
{yi1 H, . . . , yini H} be a collection of periodic H-orbits in X = Γ\G and ∆i → ∞
satisfying
    (1) the discriminant of all yij H is at most ∆i
    (2) the total volume of all the orbits in Yi is bigger than ∆ρi .
Let µi be the sum of the volume measures on the compact H-orbits yij H in Yi
(1 ≤ j ≤ ni ), divided by the total volume of these orbits (so that µi is a probability
measure). Suppose that
    (3) µi → µ as i → ∞ in the weak∗ topology for some probability measure µ.
Then
                                               m
                                               X
                                         µ=          ai νi
                                               i=0

with m ∈ N ∪ {∞} and
    (a) each νi is a H-invariant probability measure on X, and ai ≥ 0.
    (b) for every i ≥ 1 the measure νi is the Li invariant probability measure on a
        single periodic orbit of some closed subgroup Li ≤ G which properly contains
        H.
        Pm
    (c)    i=1 ai ≥ cn ρ, where cn is a constant which depends only on n.
Explicitly, we can take23
                                                  1
                                        cn =         .
                                               2 n+1
                                                   3
In particular, µ is not compactly supported.
Proof. Decompose µ into its H ergodic components,
                                    Z
                                µ = νdτ (ν)

   23If one assumes the discriminant of all y H is precisely ∆ , this constant can be improved
                                               ij                i
by a factor of two. In either case this bound is far from optimal – and indeed a better bound can
be obtained if one makes a more careful analysis.
32            M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


where τ is a probability measure on the space of (Borel) H-invariant and ergodic
probability measures on X. Then, if a(t) is a one-parameter subgroup of H,
                                     Z
                          hµ (a(·)) = hν (a(·))dτ (ν).

By Theorem 4.9, each such ν with hν (a(·)) > 0 is algebraic: i.e. is the L-invariant
probability measure on a single periodic L orbit, with L a closed group properly
containing H (depending on ν), and furthermore each such ν is not compactly
supported. Since there are only finitely many possibilities for L, and any such L
has only countably many periodic orbits24 it follows that we can write µ as
                                           X
                               µ = a0 ν0 +     ai νi
                                                     i

with ai ≥ 0, hν0 (a(·)) = 0 and each νi an Li invariant probability measure on a
single periodic Li orbit, Li > H a closed subgroup of G. This establishes (1) and
(2) in Theorem 5.1.
   By Theorem 3.1, we know that hµ (a(·)) ≥ ρcn hµHaar (a(·)) for
                                                                          
                                                n−1 n−3             −n + 1
        a(t) = exp(th)       with h = diag           ,        ,...,          ∈h
                                                  2      2             2
and cn = [2 n+1      . Since, by Ruelle’s inequality25 the Haar measure on Γ\G has
                 −1
              3 ]
maximal entropy, we have:
                               Z
                   hµ (a(·)) = hν (a(·))dτ (ν)
                               X                                 X
                             =     ai hνi (a(·)) ≤ hµHaar (a(·))    ai
                                    i≥1                               i≥1
                   P
it follows that        i≥1 ai ≥ cn ρ as claimed.                                                

5.1. Periodic orbits within a fixed compact set. We now turn to proving
Theorem 1.4. This theorem states that if n ≥ 3, G = PGLn (R), and Γ = PGLn (Z),
for any ε > 0, and any compact Ω ⊂ X = Γ\G, the total volume of all periodic H
orbits completely contained in Ω with discriminant ≤ ∆ is ≪ε,Ω ∆ε .

Proof of Theorem 1.4. Fix Ω, ε. Suppose in contradiction that there is some C and
an infinite sequence of ∆i → ∞ so that, for every i, there is a collection of periodic
orbits Yi = {yi1 H, . . . , yini H} so that
       (i) each yij H ⊂ Ω,
           the discriminant disc(yij H) ≤ ∆i ,
      (ii) P
             ni                  ε
     (iii)   j=1 vol(yij H) ≥ C∆i .

     24This countability issue is mostly irrelevant for our purposes, but for completeness suppose
xL is periodic for x = gΓ. Either by [37, Thm 1.1] (where one needs first to show that x is
periodic also under L′ = [L, L])
                                or, more directly, by [6, Prop. 2.1] there are only countably many
possibilities for gLg −1 . But g ′ : g ′ Lg ′−1 = gLg −1 = gNG (L) and [NG (L) : L] < ∞. Hence
given a conjugate L̃ of L there are only finitely many orbits xL in X for which x can be written
as ΓgL with gLg −1 = L̃.
   25This is usually stated for diffeomorphisms of compact metric spaces. In the context we need,
the claim is contained in [28, Theorem 9.7].
                      DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                            33


Define for each i a probability measure µi as in Theorem 5.1. By (i) above, all the
measures µi are supported on the compact set Ω, and so without loss of generality
we can assume that µi converge weak∗ to some probability measure µ which would
also be supported on Ω.
   However, Yi satisfy all the assumptions of Theorem 5.1, and it follows that µ
cannot be compactly supported — a contradiction.                                 
5.2. Density of periodic orbits for R-split division algebras. Because (3) of
Theorem 5.1 is automatically satisfied, for the compact quotients X = Γ\G arising
from R-split degree n ≥ 3 division algebras over Q one can get more precise infor-
mation regarding density properties of periodic H-orbits. We recall Theorem 1.6
in a slightly more explicit phrasing:
Theorem 1.6′ . Let X = Γ\G be as in (L-2) of the introduction, i.e. Γ is a lattice
in G = PGLn (R) associated to a division algebra over Q (see Section 4.1.1 for
details). For any i let (xi,j )j=1,...,Ni be a finite collection of H-periodic points with
distinct H-orbits such that
                        XN i

                             vol(xi,j H) ≥ C max(disc(xi,j H))ρ .
                                                 j
                        j=1

Suppose that there is no periodic L-orbit of a group H < L < G (with both
                                                         S
inclusions proper) containing infinitely many xi,j . Then i,j xi,j H = Γ\G.
Proof. Suppose that the sequence of collections of H-periodic orbits
                        Yi = {yi1 H, . . . , yij H}   i = 1, 2, . . .
forms a counterexample for some fixed S   C, ρ, i.e. this sequence satisfies all the
                                            ni
conditions of the above statement, but i=1      yij H do not become dense. Then
there is some open U ⊂ X so that for every i, j we have that yij H ∩ U = ∅.
   Define probability measures µi for each Yi as in the proof of Theorem 1.4, and
passing to a subsequence if necessary we may assume that the measures µiP  converge
                                                                            ∞
in the weak∗ topology to a probability measure µ. By Theorem 5.1, µ = i=0 ai νi
with ai ≥ 0, hν0 (a(·)) = 0 and each νi an Li invariant probability
                                                              P      measure on a
single periodic Li orbit, Li > H a closed subgroup of G, and i≥1 ai ≥ cn ρ.
   Suppose ν1 is a L1 invariant probability measure on the periodic orbit x1 L1 ,
with a1 > 0 and L1 > H. It follows from [35, Thm. 2.13] (see the beginning of the
proof of Theorem 4.8) that x1 L1 contains a periodic H orbit, say zH.
   Define
                                     \ [ [  ni
                               Y =             yij H.
                                        k≥1 i≥k j=1
Since U is open and disjoint from all yij H, we have that U ∩ Y = ∅. Also, since
µi converge to µ, and µ ≥ a1 ν1 , we know that zL1 = x1 L1 ⊂ Y . Let M ≥ L1 be
a maximal closed connected subgroup of G so that the orbit zM is periodic and is
contained in Y . Clearly U ∩ Y = ∅ implies that M 6= G. On the other hand, since
M 6= G it follows from the assumptions of Theorem 1.6 that there is some i0 so
that yij 6∈ zM for all i ≥ i0 , hence
                                               
                                \ [ [ ni
                         Y =             yij H  ⊂ Y \ zM .
                              k≥i0    i≥k j=1
34         M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


By Theorem 4.8, there is a strictly bigger M̃ > M so that z M̃ is periodic and
contained in Y — a contradiction.                                            

           6. Applications to sharpening Minkowski’s theorem
   In this Section, we translate one of the foregoing results into number-theoretic
terms. As it turns out, it has a rather pleasant application to sharpening an old
result of Minkowski.
6.1. Minkowski’s theorem. We recall Minkowski’s theorem regarding ideal classes,
which in particular implies finiteness of the ideal class group:
Theorem 6.1 (Minkowski’s theorem). Let K be a number field with maximal order
OK . Thenpany ideal class for K possesses a representative J ⊂ OK of norm
N (J) = O( disc(K)) where the implicit constant depends only on d.
   We conjecture that this is not sharp for totally real number fields of degree d ≥ 3
insofar as one can replace O(·) by o(·):
Conjecture 6.2. Suppose d ≥ 3 is fixed. Then any ideal   p class in a totally real
number fields of degree d has a representative of norm o( disc(K)).
  We expect that this is false for d = 2. See discussion in Sec. 6.2.
  Let K be a number field, OK its integer ring, and [J] an ideal class of OK .
We will denote the regulator of K (more precisely of the integer ring OK ) by RK .
Define
                           m([J], K) =          min         N (J)
                                         J ′ ∈[J],J ′ ⊂OK

                               m(K) = max m([J], K).
                                          [J]

where, in the latter definition, the maximum is taken over all ideal classes of K.
Let hδ (K) be the number of ideal classes in K with m([J], K) > δ disc(K)1/2 .
  We prove the following towards Conjecture 6.2:
Theorem 6.3. Let d ≥ 3, and let K denote a totally real number field of degree d.
For all ε, δ > 0 we have:
                          X
(6.1)                            RK hδ (K) ≪ε,δ X ε
                            disc(K)<X

In particular:
    (1) “Conjecture 6.2 is true for almost all fields”: The number of fields K with
        discriminant ≤ X for which m(K) ≥ δ · disc(K)1/2 is Oǫ (X ǫ ), for any
        ǫ, δ > 0;
    (2) “Conjecture 6.2 is true for fields with large regulator”: If Ki is any sequence
        of fields for which lim inf loglog RK
                                         disc(K) > 0, then m(Ki ) = o(disc(Ki )
                                                                               1/2
                                                                                   ).
   By comparison, we note that Conjecture 6.2 follows from Conjecture 1.3 – see
Corollary 6.6. Moreover, if one assumes the GRH one may show that m(K) ≪ε
             −2
(disc K)1+ε RK  , i.e., one may show a quantitative version of the second assertion of
the Theorem, but only in the range when RK is significantly larger than (disc K)1/4 .
The proof of this is very easy, but we postpone it to the paper [14], where we discuss
ζ-functions more systematically.
                      DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                            35


   While the statement of both the Conjecture and Theorem are quite modest
(postulating only o(D1/2 ) instead of O(D1/2 )), we note that Minkowski’s bound is
in any case very close to sharp:
Proposition 6.4. For any d ≥ 2 there exists a c′ > 0 such that there is an infinite
set of totally real fields of degree d for which m(K) ≥ c′ ·disc(K)1/2 (log disc(K))1−2d .
Proof. It has been proved by Duke [8] that there exist infinitely many totally real
fields K of degree d whose class number is ≥ c(d) disc(K)1/2 (log disc(K))−d , where
c(d) is an explicit positive function of d. On the other hand, the total number of
integral ideals with norm m is bounded by σd (m), where σd (m) is the number of
ways of writing m as an ordered product of d non-negative  integers. So, the number
of integral ideals with norm ≤ X is bounded by m≤X σd (m) ≪ X log(X)d−1 .
                                                    P
Thus there must exist at least one ideal class which has no representative with
norm ≪ disc(K)1/2 (log disc(K))1−2d .                                             

6.2. Translation to dynamics. Throughout this section, let G = PGLd (R), Γ =
PGLd (Z), X = Γ\G, and H < G the group of diagonal matrices.
    As we show in Proposition 6.5 below, if K is a totally real number field of a degree
d and θ : K ⊗ R → Rd is an algebra isomorphism, m([J], K) is intimately related
to how far the H-orbit of (the homothety class of) the lattice θ(J −1 ) (considered
as an element of X) penetrates the cusp of X. Recall that this orbit is the periodic
H-orbit associated to the data (K, [J −1 ], θ), in the notation of Corollary 4.4.
    For d = 2 there is no reason to believe there should be any constraints on such
an H-orbit, and we expect that Theorem 6.1 cannot be improved in this case.
Establishing this rigorously is somewhat complicated because not all periodic H-
orbits can be obtained as θ(J −1 ) for some ideal J ⊂ OK (by Corollary 4.4 the
periodic H-orbit are encoded by triples (K, [L], θ), and in this section we are only
interested in periodic orbits for which the associated order OL is the maximal order,
i.e. OK ).
    Because the dynamics of the action of H on X is much more rigid for d ≥ 3
(see §4), we expect the stronger Conjecture 6.2 to hold, and we show in §6.3 that
Conjecture 6.2 would follow from Conjecture 1.3.

6.3. Small norm representatives of ideal classes and H-orbits. For any
δ > 0 let Ω′δ ⊂ X denote the set of homothety classes of lattices Λ < Rd containing
no vector v with kvkd∞ < δ covol(Λ); equivalently
                    n                                               o
                                     d
               Ω′δ = Γg ∈ X : kmgk∞ ≥ δ det(g) for every m ∈ Zd .

This set is compact by Mahler’s Compactness Criterion [36, Cor. 10.9], giving a
slightly different system of neighborhoods of infinity to that used earlier ((2.1)).
We note that Ω′a ⊂ Ω′b if a > b. The previous system of neighbourhoods, however,
has the advantage of being defined for a general group.
Proposition 6.5. Let K be a totally real number field of degree d, θK : K ⊗R → Rd
an algebra isomorphism, and J a fractional ideal of K. Let Y be the periodic H-orbit
on Γ\G associated to the data (K, [J −1 ], θ). Then the following are equivalent:
    (a) m(K, [J]) < δ disc(K)1/2
    (b) Y is not contained in Ω′δ .
36          M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


Proof. Let us first notice that, if Q  Λ ⊂ Rd is a lattice, then H.Λ ⊂ Ω′δ if and only if,
for all (x1 , . . . , xd ) ∈ L, we have i |xi | ≥ δcovol(Λ).
   Apply this remark to the lattice Λ = θ(J −1 ); recall that Y is precisely the
H-orbit of this lattice (or, rather, its homothety class). The covolume of Λ is
N (J)−1 (disc K)1/2 , where N (J) is the norm of the ideal J. On the other hand the
product of the coordinates of θ(x) (for x ∈ K) is the norm N (x).
   Therefore, condition (b) is equivalent to:
(6.2)          There exists x ∈ J −1 ,    |N (x)| ≤ δN (J)−1 (disc K)1/2 .
   But elements x ∈ J −1 map surjectively onto the set of ideals I ⊂ OK which
belong to the same ideal class as J; the map is x 7→ x.J. Therefore, (6.2) translates
to condition (a).                                                                  
   Note that, for δ sufficiently large, Ω′δ is empty. Thus the Proposition immedi-
ately implies Theorem 6.1 (at least for totally real K). Another direct corollary of
Proposition 6.5 is the following:
Corollary 6.6. Conjecture 1.3 implies Conjecture 6.2.
Proof. If Conjecture 6.2 were false, then for some δ > 0 there is an infinite sequence
of totally real fields Ki (equipped with anpalgebra isomorphism θi : Ki ⊗ R → Rd )
and ideals Ji ⊂ OKi with m([Ji ], Ki ) ≥ δ disc(K). By Proposition 6.5 this gives
us an infinite sequence of periodic H-orbits all inside the fixed compact set Ω′δ , in
contradiction to Conjecture 1.3.                                                    
   Substituting Theorem 1.4 for Conjecture 1.3, a similar argument gives the fol-
lowing:
Proof of Theorem 6.3. Suppose Theorem 6.3 was false. Then there will be C, ε, δ >
0 and a sequence of integers Di → ∞ so that
                        X
(6.3)                          RK hδ (K) > CDiε   for all i,
                      disc(K)<Di

the summation being on totally real   p number fields of degree d. Fix for every totally
real field K for which m(K) ≥ δ disc(K) an algebra isomorphism θK : K ⊗ R →
  d
Rp  . Let [JK,j ] (j = 1,. . . , hδ (K)) be the ideal classes of K with m([JK,j ], K) ≥
δ disc(K).
    Let YK,j be the periodic H-orbit parameterized (in the language of Corollary 4.4)
           −1                                                           −1
by (K, [JK,j  ], θK ), i.e. the H-orbit of the homothety class of θK (JK,j ). Corollary
4.4 states that YK,j are periodic H-orbits with volume proportional to RK and
discriminant proportional to disc(K); Proposition 6.5 shows that YK,j ⊂ Ω′δ .
    Our assumption (6.3) implies that the collections of periodic H-orbits
        Ci = {YK,j : K totally real with disc(K) < Di , 1 ≤ j ≤ hδ (K)} ⊂ Ω′δ
have discriminant ≤ Di and total volume ≫ Diε , contradicting Theorem 1.4.              

        7. Examples of periodic orbits which do not equidistribute
   In this section we discuss in detail the example of n = 2 (where rigidity for the
action of the diagonal group completely breaks down) as well as examples for n ≥ 3
showing that individual orbits can escape to the cusp. The latter class of examples
                     DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                          37


are particularly relevant, because they suggest strongly that some of the hypotheses
in our previous theorems cannot be easily removed.
7.1. Abundance of periodic orbits in compact sets in PGL2 (Z)\ PGL2 (R).
As we discussed in section 2 there are two natural parameters attached to each
periodic H-orbit ΓgH of an arithmetic quotients Γ\G. The discriminant disc(ΓgH)
which measures the arithmetic complexity of the orbit and the volume (or regulator)
of the orbit vol(ΓgH) which is the covolume of the lattice g −1 Γg ∩ H in H. As
we have seen it is natural for us to order the periodic orbits by their discriminant
but to use the volume as weights when counting the orbits. In this sense the
next theorem shows that quite many periodic orbits under the geodesic flow on
PGL2 (Z)\ PGL2 (R) belong to a fixed compact set.
Theorem 7.1. Let G = PGL2 (R), Γ = PGL2 (Z), and X2 = Γ\G. Let
                           t/2                  
                             e
                      H=                   : t ∈ R
                                   e−t/2
be the diagonal Cartan so that the action of H on X2 is precisely the geodesic flow
on the (unit tangent bundle of the) unimodular surface. Then for every ǫ > 0 there
exists a δ > 0 such that
                              X
                                          vol(ΓgH) ≫ ∆1−ǫ ,
                       disc(ΓgH)≤∆,ΓgH⊂Ω′δ

where Ω′δ is the compact set defined in Section 6.3.
   In comparison, we remark that without the restriction on the compact set (cf.
[44])                     X
                                  vol(ΓgH) ≪ε ∆3/2+ε .
                         disc(ΓgH)≤∆
   This theorem is just a special case of the general philosophy that the dynamics
of R-rank one Cartan groups H ⊂ PGL2 is very flexible. Using similar methods the
theorem can be generalized to periodic orbits arising e.g. from cubic number fields
with one real and one complex embedding (where S1 × R>0 ∼     = H < PGL3 (R)). We
restrict our attention to the special case of the geodesic flow only for brevity, and
to be able to give a simple self contained treatment. We will indicate references for
the general case. However, as we have seen the higher rank case is very different,
see Section 5.
   For the proof of Theorem 7.1 we will need several lemmata.
Lemma 7.2. (cf. Proposition 2.8) There exists a constant C > 0 such that
                          vol(ΓgH) ≥ log disc(ΓgH) − C
for any periodic orbits ΓgH.
Proof. Since both the volume (i.e. regulator) and the discriminant only depend on
the order and not on the proper ideal associated to the orbit in Corollary 4.4, we
can assume without loss of generality (replacing, in √ the notation of that Corollary,
                                                                                √
“L” by “OL ”) that the orbit is defined by data (Q( D), O, θ), where O ⊂ Q( D)
is the order of discriminant D.
    By definition O gives rise to a lattice ΛO := θ(O) ⊂ R2 of covolume D1/2 . Since
1 ∈ O we have (1, 1) ∈ ΛO which is a “short vector” in comparison to the covolume.
To see better why (1, 1) is short, let us renormalize ΛO by a homothety to covolume
38             M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


one. Then (D−1/4 ,    D−1/4 ) belongs                                1
                                      to the so obtained lattice ΛO . Applying the
                           t/2
                         e
geodesic flow ht =                     (in either direction) makes this vector longer.
                               e−t/2
However, as long as |t/2| ≤ log(D1/4 /2) the vector vt = (D−1/4 , D−1/4 )h−1   t   would
still be of norm less than one. Note that vt is moving along a hyperbola for varying
values of t. The unimodular lattice Λ1O ht−1 can only contain (up to sign) one vector
of length less than one. Therefore, t 7→ Λ1O h−1   t  is injective for t ∈ [− 21 log D +
         1
2 log 2, 2 log D − 2 log 2] and the lemma follows.                                     
   We recall the notion of topological entropy for a continuous transformation T :
Y → Y on a compact metric space (Y, d). For η > 0 and a positive integer N let
sη,N (β) be the maximal number of points y1 , y2 , . . . , ysη,N such that for any i 6= j
there exists some 0 ≤ k < N with d(T k yi , T k yj ) > η. Then the topological entropy
is defined by
                                                  log sη,n (β)
                        htop (T ) = lim lim sup                 .
                                    η→0 n→∞            n
   The following is a simple special case of a very general fact, see [23] and the
references therein.
Lemma 7.3. For any ǫ > 0 there exists δ > 0 such that the restriction T of (the
time one map of the geodesic flow) h1 to
                            Yδ = {x ∈ Ω′δ : ht .x ∈ Ω′δ for all t > 0}
satisfies htop (T ) > 1 − ǫ. In fact, we have sη,N ≥ e(1−ǫ)N for sufficiently small η.
Proof. Recall that u ∈ R is badly approximable (BA) if26 lim inf m→∞ mhmui > 0
and that the set of badly approximable numbers has Hausdorff dimension one.
Moreover, since the Hausdorff dimension of a countable union is a supremum of
the dimensions of the individual sets, it follows that for small enough δ > 0 the set
BA(δ) of elements u ∈ [0, 12 ] with lim inf m→∞ mhmui > δ has Hausdorff dimension
greater than 1 − ǫ. In particular, for sufficiently small η1 > 0 there exist at least
  −(1−ǫ)
η1                u∈
         many such          BA(δ) that are at least η1 far apart.
                   1 −u
   Let xu = Γ                  for some u ∈ BA(δ). We claim that xu ∈ Yδ . For, if
                        1
                                                                  −t/2        
                                                          1 −u       e
not, there exists t > 0 is sothat the lattice Z2                                   contains
                                                               1            et/2
a vector (me−t/2 , |mu + m′ |et/2 ) whose coordinates have product ≤ δ in absolute
                                          ′
value. Thenm 6= 0 and |m(mu    +m      )| < δ.
               1 u −1             1 eu
   Since h1            h1 =                 it follows that the distance between two close
                   1                  1
                                             
                                       1 R
by points on the same orbit of                   is uniformly increasing until the distance
                                            1
is bigger than the injectivity radius of the local isomorphismbetween G and X
                                                                        1 −ui
at the image point. For u1 , u2 ∈ BA(δ) the points xi = Γ                          will stay
                                                                             1
forever in Ω′δ . So if u1 , u2 are η1 = e−N η0 far apart, we can ensure by choosing η0
sufficiently small that d(T k .x1 , T k .x2 ) > η for some k with 0 ≤ k < N . This shows
that sη,N ≥ e(1−ǫ)N for sufficiently large N and so htop (T ) ≥ 1 − ǫ as claimed. 
     26In this context, hxi denotes the nearest integer.
                       DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                                39


  To obtain periodic points from the above lemma regarding topological entropy
we need the following standard facts from hyperbolic dynamics. We do not give
here the statements in their full strength — not even for the special case considered
here, see e.g. [22, Sec. 18.1.].
Lemma 7.4. (Shadowing lemma) For any ηs > 0 there exists ρs > 0 such that
if d(x− , x+ ) < ρs , then there exists y with d(ht .y, ht .x− ) < ηs for all t ≤ 0 and
d(ht .y, ht .x+ ) < ηs for all t ≥ 0.
   (Anosov closing lemma) For any ηc > 0 there exists ρc > 0 such that if d(x, hN x) <
ρc for some N ≥ 1, then there exists y and T ∈ [N − ηc , N + ηc ] such that hT .y = y
and d(ht .x, ht .y) < ηc for t ∈ [0, N ].
                                                    
                                             g11 g12
Proof. Write x− = g.x+ with g =                        , d(g, e) < ρ and det g = 1. Define
                                             g21 g22
             
       1 u
y=              .x− . It is easy to see that for small enough values of u this y will always
            1                                                                          
                                                                     1 u         g11 g12
satisfy the first part of the shadowing statement. Since y =                                .x+ =
                                                                         1       g21 g22
                             
  g11 + g21 u g12 + g22 u
                                .x+ , it follows similarly that for u = − gg2212
                                                                                  both parts to
      g21             g22
shadowing hold true.                                                     
                                                                     1
   Suppose now hN .x = g.x with g as before. Define x̃ =                     .x. Then
                                                                     u 1
                                                                   
                          1        −1              1              1
          hN .x̃ = hN             h h .x = −N                g            .x̃
                          u 1 N N                 e u 1          −u 1
                                                                                  
                                     g11 − ug12                        g12
                 =                                                                   .x̃.
                      −e−N g12 u2 + e−N g11 u − g22 u + g21 g22 + e−N ug12
If ρc and so (g11 − 1), g12 , g21 , (g22 − 1) are sufficiently small, the quadratic poly-
nomial in the low left corner has a unique root u close to zero. In other words
by replacing
           x by the close by point x̃ we can assume that g21 = 0. Now define
      1 v
y=           .x̃. A similar calculation (which in fact now leads to a linear equation)
         1
shows the Anosov closing lemma.                                                        

Lemma 7.5. Let ǫ and δ be as in Lemma 7.3. Then the number of periodic orbits
of length less than V that are contained in Ω′δ is ≫ e(1−ǫ)V .
Proof. By Lemma 7.3 we can choose η such that for large enough N there are ≫
e(1−ǫ)V many points x1 , . . . ∈ Yδ with d(hk .xi , hk .xj ) > η for 0 ≤ k = k(i, j) < N .
We are going to apply both parts of Lemma 7.4. The parameters ηs and ηc we choose
such that after application of both statements to get points y1 , . . . ∈ X we still have
d(hk .yi , hk .yj ) > η/2 for k = k(i, j). By choosing the parameters for the closing
statement first, we can assume that 2ηs < ρc . Since the geodesic flow is ergodic,
there exists a finite ρs -dense set of points z1 , . . . , zℓ in Ω′δ and for every zi finitely
many times t(i, j) such that the set of points ht(i,j) .zi for varying j is (ρc − 2ηs )-
dense in Ω′δ . Therefore, for every xm we can find a zi with d(hN .xm , zi ) < ρs
and obtain by shadowing a point x̃m with d(x̃m , hN +t(i,j) .x̃m ) < ρc . Applying the
closing lemma, we arrive at points y1 , . . . ∈ X with periodic orbits. These periodic
points belong for varying N to a fixed compact set, namely to a neighborhood of
40            M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


the union of Ω′δ and the finite pieces of the orbits of z1 , . . . , zℓ used in the argument.
The length of the orbits are all below V = N + maxi,j ti,j + ηc . In particular, every
periodic orbit can be counted at most O(V ) times since any two points in the list
are at some moment η/2 far apart. Since ǫ is arbitrary, this does not affect the
statement of the lemma.                                                                    

Proof of Theorem 7.1. Let ǫ, δ be as in Lemma 7.3. Since there is a lower bound
on the length of an H-orbit we have
                             X
                                        vol(ΓgH) ≫ e(1−ǫ)V
                        vol(ΓgH)≤V,ΓgH⊂Ω′δ

by Lemma 7.5. If we set V = log ∆−C, then vol(ΓgH) ≤ V implies disc(ΓgH) ≤ ∆
by Lemma 7.2. Therefore,
                        X
                                  vol(ΓgH) ≫ e(1−ǫ)V ≫ ∆1−ǫ
                   disc(ΓgH)≤∆,ΓgH⊂Ω′δ

as claimed.                                                                               

7.2. Fields of small regulator and non-equidistributed orbits in higher
rank; proof of Theorem 1.10. As an example which is illuminating in its own
right, we construct using the above parameterizations a sequence of periodic H-
orbits for which a positive fraction of mass escapes to the cusp. More precisely, we
shall construct a sequence of periodic H-orbits Yi on PGLn (Z)\ PGLn (R) with the
following properties, for some constants an , bn > 0:
     (1) The number of Yi with discriminant ≤ ∆ is ≫ ∆an .
     (2) Any weak limit of the H-invariant probability measures µYi on Yi has total
         mass ≤ 1 − bn .
  This example will, in particular, prove Theorem 1.10 asserted in the Introduction.
We would like to thank Peter Sarnak for suggesting the possibility of it.

Proof. Indeed, Duke has established (cf. [8, §3, Prop. 1]) that, for every degree
n, there is a constant C = C(n) and infinitely many totally real fields Ki whose
Galois closure has Galois group Sn and whose regulators satisfy the inequality
RKi < C(log disc(Ki ))n−1 .
   For each such Ki , let Oi be the maximal order, fix an algebra isomorphism
Ki ⊗ R → Rn , and consider the periodic orbit associated to the triple (Ki , [Oi ], θ).
   Let α : Ki ⊗ R → Rn be the map x 7→ (log |θ(x)1 |, log |θ(x)2 |, . . . , log |θ(x)n |).
Let Λ be the image of Oi× under the map α. Then the R-span ΛR P              of Λ is, by
Dirichlet’s unit theorem, precisely the subspace {(y1 , . . . , yn ) ∈ Rn :     yi = 0},
the image under α of elements (Ki ⊗ R)(1) of norm 1. Moreover, α induces an
isomorphism of torii
                              α : (Ki ⊗ R)(1) /Oi× → ΛR /Λ
   Endowing the left-hand torus with the measure transported from Lebesgue mea-
sure on ΛR ⊂ Rn , the volume of the left-hand torus is RKi . On the other hand:
     (1) Since Ki has no intermediate subfields, all nonzero elements of Λ have
         Euclidean length ≥ c log disc(Ki ), for a certain constant c depending only
         on n (cf. e.g. [40] or proof of Corollary 4.2 (ii))
                        DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS                                   41


    (2) If x ∈ (Ki ⊗ R)(1) is such that | log |θ(x)i || ≤ 2c log disc(Ki ) for each i, then
        the lattice θ(x.Oi ), which has covolume ≍ disc(K)1/2 , contains a vector of
                              √
        Euclidean length ≤ n(disc Ki )c/2 .
   Fix a compact subset Ω ⊂ PGLn (Z)\ PGLn (R). It follows from these remarks
that there is a subset (Ki ⊗ R)(1) /Oi× of volume ≫ c′ (log disc(Ki ))n−1 , where
c′ depends only on n, such that the lattice θ(x.Oi ) does not belong to Ω for all
sufficiently large i. Since the total volume of (Ki ⊗ R)(1) /Oi× w.r.t. the measure
defined above was RKi < C(log disc(Ki ))n−1 , this implies the conclusion.       

                                         References
 [1] Yves Benoist and Hee Oh. Equidistribution of rational matrices in their conjugacy classes.
     to appear in GAFA.
 [2] Armand Borel and Harish-Chandra. Arithmetic subgroups of algebraic groups. Ann. of Math.
     (2), 75:485–535, 1962.
 [3] J. Bourgain, A. Glibichuk, and S. Konyagin. Estimate for the number of sums and products
     and for exponential sums in fields of prime order. Preprint, 2005.
 [4] Jean Bourgain and Mei-Chu Chang. Sum-product theorem and exponential sum estimates
     in residue classes with modulus involving few prime factors. C. R. Math. Acad. Sci. Paris,
     339(7):463–466, 2004.
 [5] J. W. S. Cassels and H. P. F. Swinnerton-Dyer. On the product of three homogeneous linear
     forms and the indefinite ternary quadratic forms. Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. London. Ser. A.,
     248:73–96, 1955.
 [6] S. G. Dani and G. A. Margulis. Limit distributions of orbits of unipotent flows and values of
     quadratic forms. In I. M. Gel′ fand Seminar, volume 16 of Adv. Soviet Math., pages 91–137.
     Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1993.
 [7] W. Duke. Hyperbolic distribution problems and half-integral weight Maass forms. Invent.
     Math., 92(1):73–90, 1988.
 [8] W. Duke. Extreme values of Artin L-functions and class numbers. Compositio Math.,
     136(1):103–115, 2003.
 [9] M. Einsiedler and A. Katok. Invariant measures on G/Γ for split simple Lie-groups G. Comm.
     Pure Appl. Math., 56(8):1184–1221, 2003.
[10] M. Einsiedler and A. Katok. Rigidity of measures—the high entropy case and non-commuting
     foliations. Israel J. Math., 148:169–238, 2005. Probability in mathematics.
[11] M. Einsiedler, A. Katok, and E. Lindenstrauss. Invariant measures and the set of exceptions
     to Littlewood’s conjecture. to appear in Ann. of Math.
[12] Manfred Einsiedler and Elon Lindenstrauss. Diagonal flows on locally homogeneous spaces
     and number theory. to appear in the Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathe-
     maticians 2006 (29 pages), 2006.
[13] Manfred Einsiedler, Elon Lindenstrauss, Philippe Michel, and Akshay Venkatesh. The distri-
     bution of periodic torus orbits, II. in preparation, 2006.
[14] Manfred Einsiedler, Elon Lindenstrauss, Philippe Michel, and Akshay Venkatesh. The distri-
     bution of periodic torus orbits, III: Duke’s theorem for cubic fields. in preparation, 2006.
[15] Alex Eskin and Hee Oh. Representations of integers by an invariant polynomial and unipotent
     flows. to appear in Duke Math. Journal.
[16] Alexander Gorodnik. Open problems from the workshop “Emerging Applications of
     Measure Rigidity” held at the American Institute of Mathematics. 2004. Available at
     http://www.aimath.org/WWN/measrigid.
[17] Gergely Harcos and Philippe Michel. The subconvexity problem for Rankin-Selberg L-
     functions and equidistribution of Heegner points. II. Invent. Math., 163(3):581–655, 2006.
[18] Thomas W. Hungerford. Algebra, volume 73 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer-
     Verlag, New York, 1980. Reprint of the 1974 original.
[19] Boris Kalinin and Ralf Spatzier. Rigidity of the measurable structure for algebraic actions of
     higher-rank Abelian groups. Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 25(1):175–200, 2005.
[20] A. Katok and R. J. Spatzier. Invariant measures for higher-rank hyperbolic abelian actions.
     Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 16(4):751–778, 1996.
42           M. EINSIEDLER, E. LINDENSTRAUSS, PH. MICHEL, A. VENKATESH


[21] A. Katok and R. J. Spatzier. Corrections to: “Invariant measures for higher-rank hyperbolic
     abelian actions” [Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems 16 (1996), no. 4, 751–778; MR 97d:58116].
     Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 18(2):503–507, 1998.
[22] Anatole Katok and Boris Hasselblatt. Introduction to the modern theory of dynamical sys-
     tems, volume 54 of Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications. Cambridge University
     Press, Cambridge, 1995. With a supplementary chapter by Katok and Leonardo Mendoza.
[23] D. Y. Kleinbock and G. A. Margulis. Bounded orbits of nonquasiunipotent flows on homo-
     geneous spaces. In Sinaı̆’s Moscow Seminar on Dynamical Systems, volume 171 of Amer.
     Math. Soc. Transl. Ser. 2, pages 141–172. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1996.
[24] Elon Lindenstrauss. Invariant measures and arithmetic quantum unique ergodicity. Ann. of
     Math. (2), 163(1):165–219, 2006.
[25] Elon Lindenstrauss and Barak Weiss. On sets invariant under the action of the diagonal
     group. Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 21(5):1481–1500, 2001.
[26] Yu. V. Linnik. Ergodic properties of algebraic fields. Translated from the Russian by M. S.
     Keane. Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete, Band 45. Springer-Verlag New
     York Inc., New York, 1968.
[27] G. A. Margulis. Oppenheim conjecture. In Fields Medallists’ lectures, volume 5 of World Sci.
     Ser. 20th Century Math., pages 272–327. World Sci. Publishing, River Edge, NJ, 1997.
[28] G. A. Margulis and G. M. Tomanov. Invariant measures for actions of unipotent groups over
     local fields on homogeneous spaces. Invent. Math., 116(1-3):347–392, 1994.
[29] G. A. Margulis and G. M. Tomanov. Measure rigidity for almost linear groups and its appli-
     cations. J. Anal. Math., 69:25–54, 1996.
[30] Gregory Margulis. Problems and conjectures in rigidity theory. In Mathematics: frontiers
     and perspectives, pages 161–174. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2000.
[31] Shahar Mozes and Nimish Shah. On the space of ergodic invariant measures of unipotent
     flows. Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 15(1):149–159, 1995.
[32] Hee Oh. Finiteness of compact maximal flats of bounded volume. Ergodic Theory Dynam.
     Systems, 24(1):217–225, 2004.
[33] Vladimir Platonov and Andrei Rapinchuk. Algebraic groups and number theory, volume 139
     of Pure and Applied Mathematics. Academic Press Inc., Boston, MA, 1994. Translated from
     the 1991 Russian original by Rachel Rowen.
[34] Alexandru Popa. Central values of rankin l-series over real quadratic fields. to appear in
     Compositio Math.
[35] Gopal Prasad and M. S. Raghunathan. Cartan subgroups and lattices in semi-simple groups.
     Ann. of Math. (2), 96:296–317, 1972.
[36] M. S. Raghunathan. Discrete subgroups of Lie groups. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1972.
     Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete, Band 68.
[37] Marina Ratner. On Raghunathan’s measure conjecture. Ann. of Math. (2), 134(3):545–607,
     1991.
[38] Marina Ratner. Raghunathan’s topological conjecture and distributions of unipotent flows.
     Duke Math. J., 63(1):235–280, 1991.
[39] M. Rees. Some R2 -anosov flows. 1982.
[40] Robert Remak. Über Grössenbeziehungen zwischen Diskriminante und Regulator eines alge-
     braischen Zahlkörpers. Compositio Math., 10:245–285, 1952.
[41] Daniel J. Rudolph. ×2 and ×3 invariant measures and entropy. Ergodic Theory Dynam.
     Systems, 10(2):395–406, 1990.
[42] Peter Sarnak. Reciprocal geodesics. preprint (25 pages)., 2006.
[43] Nimish A. Shah. Uniformly distributed orbits of certain flows on homogeneous spaces. Math.
     Ann., 289(2):315–334, 1991.
[44] Carl Ludwig Siegel. The average measure of quadratic forms with given determinant and
     signature. Ann. of Math. (2), 45:667–685, 1944.
[45] George Tomanov. Actions of maximal tori on homogeneous spaces. In Rigidity in dynamics
     and geometry (Cambridge, 2000), pages 407–424. Springer, Berlin, 2002.
[46] George Tomanov and Barak Weiss. Closed orbits for actions of maximal tori on homogeneous
     spaces. Duke Math. J., 119(2):367–392, 2003.
