                                              ARITHMETIC OF DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS AND
                                              THE DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODIC TORUS ORBITS




arXiv:1510.08481v2 [math.NT] 25 Feb 2019
                                                                              ILYA KHAYUTIN


                                                   Abstract. We describe new arithmetic invariants for pairs of torus
                                                   orbits on groups isogenous to an inner form of PGLn over a number
                                                   field. These invariants are constructed by studying the double quotient
                                                   of a linear algebraic group by a maximal torus.
                                                       Using the new invariants we significantly strengthen results towards
                                                   the equidistribution of packets of periodic torus orbits on higher rank
                                                   S-arithmetic quotients. Packets of periodic torus orbits are natural col-
                                                   lections of torus orbits coming from a single adelic torus and are closely
                                                   related to class groups of number fields. The distribution of these orbits
                                                   is akin to the distribution of integral points on homogeneous algebraic
                                                   varieties with a torus stabilizer.
                                                       The proof combines geometric invariant theory, Galois actions, local
                                                   arithmetic estimates and homogeneous dynamics.




                                                                                 Contents
                                             1. Introduction                                                                     1
                                             2. The General Setting                                                             13
                                             3. Geometric Invariant Theory of a Double Quotient by a Torus                      16
                                             4. Double Torus Quotient for SLn and PGLn                                          19
                                             5. Double Torus Quotient for PGL2                                                  26
                                             6. Double Torus Quotient for Central Simple Algebras                               29
                                             7. Local Integral Structure of Double Torus Quotient                               36
                                             8. Lower Bound for Asymptotic Entropy                                              48
                                             9. Rigidity of Limit Measures                                                      57
                                             References                                                                         60




                                                                            1. Introduction
                                           1.1. Background. Let G be a reductive linear algebraic group and H < G
                                           a maximal torus, both defined over a number field F. Many interesting affine
                                           algebraic varieties arise in the form V := GH. Our main interest is the way
                                           that families of integral points of V, defined in a suitable sense, distribute in
                                           V(R) or in related S-arithmetic spaces. We begin by examining a classical
                                           special case. For simplicity of the exposition we assume F = Q.
                                                                                       1
2                                  I. KHAYUTIN

1.2. Points on Sphere. The 2-dimensional sphere S2 is the affine variety
over Q defined by the equation
                                x21 + x22 + x23 = 1
This variety is equipped with a transitive action of G = SO3 . The stabilizer
of a point is a conjugate of H = SO2 < SO3 . Thus we can identify S2 ∼     =
SO3       =  G . Indeed, H = SO is a maximal torus of absolute rank 1
     SO2         H                   2
in G.
   Let d ∈ N, consider the integral solutions to the equation
(1)                             x21 + x32 + x23 = d
Denote by Hd the set of primitive integral solutions to (1), i.e. gcd(x1 , x2 , x3 ) =
1. Legendre’s three squares theorem implies Hd 6= ∅ if and only if d 6≡ 0, 4, 7
mod 8. Accordingly, when writing d → ∞ we consider only those d for which
there are primitive integral solutions to (1). If primitive integral solutions
exit we denote by                n √              o
                          fd := x/ d | x ∈ Hd
                          H
the radial projection of Hd to the unit sphere S2 (R). Let m be the unique
SO3 (R)-invariant probability measure on the sphere. We say that the
            fd equidistribute as d → ∞ if for any continuous function
collections H
     2
f : S (R) → C                             Z
                      1 X
                              f (x) −−−→ f (x) dm(x)
                    |Hd |           d→∞
                             fd
                           x∈H
This is weak-∗ convergence of measures. The question whether equidistri-
bution holds when the limit is taken along all possible d’s or along specific
subsequences of d’s is well studied both using analytic number theory and
homogeneous dynamics.
   The equidistribution of Hfd on the sphere has been settled by Duke [Duk88]
using automorphic forms and building upon the breakthrough of Iwaniec
[Iwa87]. Much before the appearance of the harmonic analytic solution, Lin-
nik developed in the first half to the 20th century his “ergodic method”.
Linnik was able to prove in the 1950’s the equidistribution of integral points
for specific sequences of d’s [Lin57, Lin60]. Specifically, he needed the se-
quence (di )∞i=1 to satisfy a splitting condition; he assumed that√ there is a
fixed odd prime p such that p splits in all the field extension Q( −di ). Under
the hood of Linnik’s original proof is the action of the split torus SO2 (Qp ).
The S-arithmetic quotient
                     GS               SO3 (R) × SO3 (Qp )
                   Γ\ = SO3 (Z [1/p])\
                                        2
is a compact extension of SO (Z)\S (R). The periodic orbits of the torus
                              3
                         G
SO2 (R) × SO2 (Qp ) on Γ\ can be partitioned into finite arithmetic collec-
                           S
tion called packets. For a sequence of discriminants di satisfying Linnik’s
                          DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                                 3

                                                        g
splitting condition, the equidistribution of the points Hdi follows from the
equidistribution of packet of SO2 (R) × SO2 (Qp )-periodic orbits.
1.2.1. In this paper we make progress on the problem of understanding the
distribution of packets of periodic orbits for maximal tori in higher rank
groups. Because we focus on groups of type An it is useful for us to consider
the sphere as a homogeneous space for the projective group of units of the
Hamilton quaternion algebra.
   More generally, for any rational 3-dimensional quadratic space Q = (Q3 , q)
there exists a quaternion algebra B, defined over Q, such that Q is isomor-
phic to the quadratic space (B0 (Q), Nrd), where B0 (Q) is the space of trace-
less quaternions and Nrd is the reduced norm form. The projective group of
units PB× acts isometrically on B0 by conjugation. This action furnishes
an isomorphism of algebraic groups over Q between the projective group of
units PB× and SO(q). Hence we see that SO(q) ≃ PB× is an inner form
of PGL2 . Our main focus is groups isogenous to an inner form of PGLn
for n ≥ 2.
   To make the connection to the example of the sphere completely explicit,
we mention that the quadratic form x21 + x22 + x23 corresponds to the reduced
norm form of the Hamilton quaternion algebra, which is ramified exactly
at ∞ and 2. Similarly, the quadratic form x22 − 4x21 x23 corresponds to the
reduce norm form of the split matrix algebra M2 .
1.3. The Modern Variant of Linnik’s Method. In a series of papers
Einsiedler, Lindenstrauss, Michel and Venkatesh [ELMV09],[ELMV11],[ELMV12]
have put forward a modern variant of Linnik’s method. Their approach re-
lies heavily of the notion of entropy and measure rigidity for diagonalizable
actions. In the modern viewpoint, Linnik’s method is based upon the dy-
namics of a an isotropic torus H on an S-arithmetic homogeneous space Γ\G.
In the example of the sphere G = PB× (R) × PB× (Qp) with   h ip > 2, where
B is the Hamilton quaternion algebra, and Γ = PB× Z              1
                                                                 p   . The torus
                             ×
H is the centralizer in PB       (Qp ) of a point in Hd ⊂ B0 (Q) ֒→ B0 (Qp ).
   The Kolmogorov-Sinai entropy is an invariant of a measure preserving
system that takes values in [0, ∞] . For a ∈ H the entropy hµ (a) of an
a-invariant and ergodic Borel probability measure µ on Γ\G is roughly the
exponential decay rate in N of the measure of the set of points whose tra-
jectory under a remains uniformly close to the trajectory of a typical point
at the times 1, 2, . . . , N .
   The modern variant of Linnik’s method has two distinguished parts. The
gist of the first part is to use an arithmetic well-separateness result for the or-
bits of H, together with a volume computation, to derive an estimate for the
metric entropy of any limit measure with respect to an element a ∈ H. In
the second part, this entropy estimate is the input to a measure rigidity theo-
rem which supplies the final result about the possible limit measures. In the
case of the modern proof of Linnik’s theorem [ELMV12] one establishes first
4                                I. KHAYUTIN

maximal entropy in the limit and then uses the, relatively simple, fact that
maximal entropy measures are almost unique. This general proof scheme
has been exploited by Einsiedler, Lindenstrauss, Michel and Venkatesh in
[ELMV09, ELMV11] to obtain fundamentally new results in higher rank
analogues.
   The source of the entropy in the limit in Linnik’s original argument for the
2-sphere is Linnik’s basic lemma. Its proof depends on counting representa-
tions of a binary integral quadratic form by a ternary one. This counting
argument is converted to a result about average separation between orbits
using a basic invariant - the Euclidean inner-product of two integral points
on the sphere.
   The main contribution of the work presented here is a generalization of
this invariant to higher rank and the analysis of some fundamental properties
of the new invariants. It is using these results that we are able to prove an
improved bound on the limit entropy in higher rank spaces.

1.4. Periodic torus orbits on PGLn (Z)\PGLn (R). To illustrate our
main theorem consider first the case that G = PGLn and H is a maxi-
mal torus in G(R). At first reading one can restrict to the case that H is
the group of diagonal matrices, but some of the most interesting implications
of our theorems are when H is isotropic but not split over the reals.
   Following [ELMV09] we say that an H-orbit on

                         X := PGL (Z)\PGLn (R)
                                     n

is periodic if it supports an H-invariant probability measure. Let g ∈
PGLn (R). If gHg−1 = T(R) where T < PGLn is a maximal torus de-
                                      −
fined and anisotropic over Q then g 1 Γg ∩ H is a lattice in H and the orbit
PGLn (Z)gH is periodic. We say that a periodic orbit PGLn (Z)gH is alge-
braic if gHg−1 admits the structure of a rational torus as above. For H split,
e.g. H is the group of diagonal matrices, every periodic orbit is algebraic.
This statement is wrong for non-split tori. For example, if n = 2 then any
orbit of the compact torus SO2 (R) is periodic.
   Assume that H = H(R) and that H < PGLn is a maximal torus defined
over Q. Periodic H-orbits tautologically correspond to some PGLn (Z) or-
bits on PGLn (R)H(R). Algebraic periodic H-orbits on PGL (Z)\PGLn (R)
                                                                  n
necessarily correspond to orbits of PGLn (Z) on rational points of the affine
variety underlying PGLn (R)H(R).
   The algebraic periodic H-orbits on X are partitioned into natural finite
collections called packets, whose formal definition we review in §1.5. These
packets generalize the collections Hd from §1.2. To each packet of H-orbits
we can associate an order in a degree n field extension of K/Q. If K has r1
real places and r2 inequivalent complex places then necessarily rankR H =
r1 + r2 − 1. The set of H-orbits in a single packet is a principal homogeneous
space for the Picard group of the associated order, see [ELMV09, Corollary
                         DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                            5

4.4]. The simplest packets are associated to maximal orders, viz. rings of
integers of degree n number fields. To each packet one can associate the
discriminant. This is an arithmetic property of the packet. In the special
case discussed in this section it is just the discriminant of the associated
order, which coincides with the discriminant of the number field if the order
is maximal.
   Each packet supports a canonical H-invariant probability measure. It is
defined as the uniform average over the H-invariant probability measures
supported on the individual periodic orbits in the packet. Suppose we are
given a sequence of packets {Zi }∞
                                 i=1 with discriminants Di and H-invariant
measures µi . How do the measures µi distribute on X when Di →i→∞
∞? For n = 2 the space PGL (Z)\PGL2 (R) is the unit tangent bundle
                                 2
of the modular curve. If H is the group of diagonal matrices then the
periodic H-orbits are exactly the non-divergent closed geodesics. When
n = 2 the convergence of periodic measures on H-invariant packets to the
Haar measure is again a theorem of Duke [Duk88], cf. [ELMV12, Sku62].
For n = 3 see the recent results of [ELMV11]. For higher n our state
of knowledge is not as satisfactory. Assuming non-escape of mass, only a
lower bound on the metric entropy of a limit measure was known [ELMV09,
Theorem 3.1] and only for H split, see Remark 1.3. We present a significant
improvement for this lower bound for packets satisfying a Galois condition
and without assuming that H is split.
   For any a ∈ H and ν a probability measure on X invariant under H,
denote by hν (a) the metric entropy of ν with respect to the action by a. Let
hHaar (a) be the entropy of the Haar probability measure on X, which is the
unique measure of maximal entropy. In this setting we have the following
special case of our main theorem.

Theorem 1.1. Set H < PGLn (R) to be a fixed non-compact maximal torus.
Let {Zi }∞
         i=1 be a sequence of packets of periodic H-orbits with discriminants
Di associated to maximal orders in number fields. Assume Di →i→∞ ∞.
   Let Ki be a degree n field extension of Q associated to Zi . Denote by Li
the Galois closure of Ki . Assume for all i that Gal(Li /Q) is 2-transitive
when considered as a subgroup of Sn .
   Let µi be the canonical H-invariant probability measure supported on Zi .
If µi converges in the weak-∗ topology to a probability measure µ on X then
for any a ∈ H
                                        hHaar (a)
                             hµ (a) ≥
                                        2(n − 1)

   This theorem should be compared with [ELMV09, Theorem 3.1] which
for H – the split torus of diagonal matrices and
                                                             
                         n−1             n−3                   n−1
        a = diag exp             , exp         , . . . , exp −
                           2              2                     2
6                                I. KHAYUTIN

                                3hHaar (a)
provides the bound hµ (a) ≥ (n+1)n(n−1)    without assuming a Galois condition
and without a restriction to maximal orders.
   The strength of our result compared to [ELMV09, Theorem 3.1] is that it
is valid even when H is isotropic but not split over R and the significantly
improved bound on the entropy under a Galois condition, especially for large
values of n.
   Measure rigidity results for diagonalizable actions imply in favorable sit-
uation that a measure invariant and ergodic under a higher rank torus is
algebraic, at least assuming positive entropy. For H split our entropy bound
and the measure rigidity results from [EL15] imply that µ is not supported
on a single periodic measure of a closed subgroup L < PGLn (R) all whose
simple factors have rank ≤ R where R satisfies (R + 2)(R + 1)R − 1 < n,
see Corollary 9.3. Moreover, if n is prime then no possible intermediate
algebraic measures can arise, cf. [LW01, ELMV09] and we can deduce that
µ ≥ m/(2(n − 1)) where m is the normalized Haar measure. Indeed, an
improvement in the bound on the asymptotic entropy provides more control
on the possible algebraic measures appearing in the ergodic decomposition
of µ. Extremely strong bounds on the asymptotic entropy can even imply
partial non-escape of mass. These results where pioneered in [ELMV12] and
studied further in [EK12, Kad12b, Kad12a, KP15, EKP15, KKLM17] and by
a different method in [Kha17]. The required entropy bounds for non-escape
of mass seem to be far from what is attainable with existing methods. We
stress that the general version of our theorem holds for any inner-form of
PGLn , including inner-forms arising from division algebras, for which there
is no possibility of escape of mass.
   The entropy of the measure µ with respect to the action by a semisimple
element a ∈ PGLn (R) is related to the dimension of µ along its sections
in some directions transversal to the direction of the a-action; specifically,
directions in the stable foliation. When the centralizer of a is not minimal
the measure might have non-trivial sections in many transversal direction
which do not affect the entropy. This is a significant problem when trying
to bound the entropy with respect to an action by an element which has a
big centralizer, as is the case for non-split isotropic tori in our setting. The
action of the Galois group of the splitting field on appropriate invariants
we construct is an important ingredient in overcoming this problem. The
method of proof of [ELMV09, Theorem 3.1] is fundamentally limited to
elements a whose centralizer is minimal, hence the restriction to split tori
in that result.
   To prove this theorem we construct an integral model for the GIT double
quotient of G by a maximal torus and show a bound on the separation of
points which are integral in an appropriate sense. A major difficulty is that
in rank bigger then 1 the double quotient space is not an affine space. This
is a significant obstacle if we were to try and show maximal entropy in the
limit.
                         DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                              7

   A main tool we use is geometric invariant theory. Another novel aspect
of our method is that we are able to utilize properties of the Galois groups
of splitting fields.

1.5. Inner forms of type An and homogeneous toral sets. We move
to describe the setting of our main theorem in its general form. The theorem
holds for quotients of inner forms of type An by congruence lattices. These
can all be described using central simple algebras. We fix for the rest of the
paper a number field F. Let B be the affine variety representing a central
simple algebra over F. Let G be a linear reductive group defined over F
and isogenous to PGL1 (B), i.e. G has a finite center Z and Gad := Z\G ≃
PGL1 (B). We fix once and for all an isogeny
                        SL1 (B) → G → PGL1 (B)
where SL1 (B) is the group of norm 1 units in B. This group is the simply-
connected cover of PGL1 (B). Recall that an algebraic group M defined
over F is anisotropic over F if it admits no non-trivial characters M → Gm
over F. The group G satisfies this property.
  Denote by A the ring of adeles of F. Recall that the adelic points of G
are defined as
        G(A) = {(gu )u | gu ∈ G(Fu ) and gu ∈ Ku for almost all u}
where the index u runs over all the places of F and Ku is a fixed compact-
open subgroup of G(Fu ) for all u non-archimedean. For almost all u we
need Ku < G(Fu ) to be a maximal compact subgroup. The subgroup G(F)
embeds diagonally in G(A) and it is discrete in the induced topology. The
quotient space G(F)\G(A) carries a G(A)-invariant measure that is unique
up to scaling. Because G is anisotropic over F the invariant measure is finite
and we fix it to be a probability measure.
   A rational anisotropic torus in G can be constructed in the following way.
Let K/F be a degree n field extension with a ring embedding ι : K ֒→ B(Q).
There is an affine subvariety E < B representing ι(K), i.e. ι(K) ⊗F R =
E(R) for any commutative algebra R/F. The algebraic subgroup SL1 (E) <
SL1 (B) is a maximal torus and its isogeny image in G is a maximal torus in
G defined and anistropic over F. Moreover, all maximal tori in G that are
defined and anisotropic over F arise this way. A torus T that is anisotropic
over F has the important property that T(F)\T(A) carries a unique T(A)-
invariant Borel probability measure.
   Let T < G be defined and anisotropic over F and fix gA ∈ G(A). A
subset of the form
                         G(F)T(A)gA ⊂ G(F)\G(A)
is called a homogeneous toral set. These have been introduced in [ELMV11].
Because T is anisotropic the homogeneous toral set carries a unique gA−1 T(A)gA -
invariant Borel probability measure.
8                                I. KHAYUTIN

   To each homogeneous toral set one can attach a volume and a discrimi-
nant, both are non-negative real numbers. The volume is a global quantity
that measures the size of the homogeneous toral set in geometric terms, it
is a generalization of the notion of the length of a closed geodesic. The
discriminant D is a product of local discriminants Du for each place u of
F. The local discriminant at the place u is closely related to the notion
of the local height of the subspace Lie(gu−1 T(Fu )gu ) in Lie(G)(Fu ). These
quantities have been formally defined in [ELMV11] and we review the def-
initions in §2.3. Moreover, if the torus T is associated to an embedding
of the number field K/F Q then we will construct in §7.1 an order R ⊂ K
satisfying | disc(R)| = u<∞ Du . This order depends both on the torus T
and the distortion gA ∈ G(A). We say that a homogeneous toral set is of
maximal type if this order is the ring of integers in K. Homogeneous toral
sets of maximal type are exactly the higher rank generalization of packets
of periodic geodesics attached to fundamental discriminants.
1.6. The S-arithmetic setting and packets. Let S be a finite      Q set of
places of F including all the archimedean ones. Denote FS = u∈S Fu .
Suppose S includes at least one place over which B is isotropic and that it
is large enough so that G(A) has class number one with respect to S. The
class number 1 requirement amounts to
                                             Y
                      G(A) = G(F) · G(FS ) ·     Ku
                                                u6∈S

Every finite set of places S can always be increased to a finite set satisfying
the class number 1 assumption. If G = SL1 (B) is simply-connected then
the class number assumption is satisfied for any set S as above because of
strong approximation.
                   Q                         Q
   Denote GS = u∈S G(Fu ) and K S := u6∈S Ku . Let Γ < GS be the
congruence lattice
                               Γ := G(F) ∩ K S
Under the assumptions above on S we can identify Γ\GS with the quotient
of G(F)\G(A) by K S .
   Fix a homogeneous toral set
                      Y = G(F)T(A)gA ⊂ G(F)\G(A)
and denote by µY the invariant probability measure supported on this set.
The image of Y under the projection map
                                     /K    S

                           G(F)\     −−→ Γ\GS
                                G(A) −

is called a packet of torus orbits. This packet is invariant under the action of
gS−1 T(FS )gS , where gS is the S-adic part of gA . A simple calculation shows
that the packet is a finite collection of gS−1 T(FS )gS -orbits parametrized by
a finite abelian group arising as a double quotient of T(A). The packet
                           DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                                    9

supports the push-forward of the measure µY which is a uniform average
over the periodic measures of the gS−1 T(FS )gS -orbits in the packet.
   The special case discussed in §1.4 corresponds to F = Q, B = Mn ,
G = PGLn and S = {∞}. The packets of periodic algebraic H-orbits
presented in §1.4 are a special case of the packets described in the adelic
language. They all satisfy the assumption g∞  −1 T(R)g
                                                         ∞ = H, where g∞ is
the archimedean component of gA , i.e. they are all invariant under a fixed
non-compact torus in the archimedean place.
1.7. Main Theorem: Lower Bound on Asymptotic Entropy. To present
our main theorem we need also to introduce the notion of the ramified part
of the discriminant of a homogeneous toral set. If the local discriminant of
a homogeneous toral set at a place u is denoted by Du then the ramified
local discriminant is defined as
                                     Y
                           Dram =             Du
                                      B ramifies at u
Notice that the product is over the places where B is ramified and not over
the ramified places of the torus. In particular, if B = Mn is split then
Dram = 1 for all homogeneous toral sets.
Theorem 1.2. Suppose we are given a sequence of homogeneous toral sets of
maximal type Yi = G(F)Ti (A)gi . Denote by Di the global discriminant of Yi
and let Dram,i be the ramified part of the discriminant. Assume Di →i→∞ ∞
                 o(1)
and Dram,i = Di .
   Galois Condition: Let Li /F be the splitting field of Ti . We assume for all
i that Gal(Li /F) is 2-transitive.
   Splitting Condition: We fix a place u  b ∈ S such that B is isotropic over
u            b
b. Denote F := Fub . Fix a torus H < GFb defined over F       b and such that1
rankFb H > 0. Set H = H(F).  b Assume for all i that gi,bu −1 Ti gi,bu = H, i.e.
all the sets Yi are invariant in the place ub under a fixed isotropic torus H.
   Let µi be the probability measure on Γ\GS induced by the invariant proba-
bility measure on the homogeneous toral set Yi . If µi converges in the weak-∗
topology to a probability measure µ on Γ\GS then for any a ∈ H we have
                                           hHaar (a)
                                hµ (a) ≥
                                           2(n − 1)
Where hHaar (a) is the entropy of the Haar probability measure on Γ\GS , which
is a measure of maximal entropy.
                                   b and let Φ be the set of roots for the
Remark 1.3. Assume H is split over F
torus H. The weaker bound
                               1
(2)                   hµ (a) ≥ min | log |α(a)|ub |
                               2 α∈Φ
   1The theorem is vacuously true without the non-compactness assumption for H(F).
                                                                               b
10                               I. KHAYUTIN

has been proven in [ELMV09][Theorem 3.1] for any a ∈ H but without any
Galois condition or assumption on maximality or ramification. The entropy
of the Haar measure is
                                   1X
                       hHaar (a) =    | log |α(a)|ub |
                                   2
                                       α∈Φ

   The proof of (2) goes by considering the separation of orbits implied by
attaching to the Lie algebra of Ti an integral point with denominator Di in
V                    ⊗2
    rank G
           Lie(G)(F)      . This procedure is essentially the definition of the
discriminant.
   The ability to deduce better bounds using just the adjoint representation
on the Lie algebra seems to be limited by the fact that for rank G > 1 most
of the subspaces of dimension rank G in Lie(G)(F) do not correspond to
tori.
   Without the condition on the Galois group, our method gives the same
entropy bound as in (2). A key new feature in our paper is that we are
able to use additional information about the Galois groups of the splitting
fields of the tori to give substantially more precise results. Moreover, we are
able to treat homogeneous toral sets which are invariant under a non split
isotropic torus.
   It is instructive to calculate the different available bounds for the case
that G = PGLn over Q, u      b = ∞ – the real place, H – the standard torus of
diagonal matrices and
                                                               
                           n−1             n−3                   n−1
         a = diag exp              , exp         , . . . , exp −
                             2              2                     2
The roots of H are parameterized by pairs (i, j) where 1 ≤ i 6= j ≤ n. The
values of the roots for a as above are
                             log |αi,j (a)| = j − i
In particular
                                      (n + 1)n(n − 1)
                         hHaar (a) =
                                              6
                         hHaar (a)     (n + 1)n
                                   =
                         2(n − 1)         12
                         1                       1
                           min | log |α(a)|∞ | =
                         2 α∈Φ                   2
A main difference between the bounds is that the new bound grows quadrat-
ically with n, unlike the bound (2) which is constant. In conjunction with
the measure rigidity results of [EKL06, EL15] this implies a new modest
qualitative restriction on possible limit measures. Specifically, if F = Q then
µ is not supported on a single periodic orbit of a reductive group all whose
simple parts have small absolute rank compared to G, see Corollary 9.3.
                         DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                             11

1.8. An Overview of the Proof. We present a general overview of the
proof completely in adelic terms.

Decay of mass for thin tubes. Fix an element a ∈ H. Due to essentially
upper semi-continuity of entropy, in order to bound the entropy of the limit
measure with respect to a, it is enough to show that the µi mass of small
tubes in G(F)\G(A) decays exponentially fast with a given rate when these
tubes are conjugated by a. Notice that these tubes contract in a single place
u
b only.
   The rate at which the measure of the contracting tubes decreases is our
bound on the entropy with respect to a. For this idea to apply easily we
need all our homogeneous toral sets to be invariant under the action of this
fixed a. To apply the measure rigidity results of [EKL06, EL15] one might
                                     b
need to assume that H is split over F.
   This method for proving a bound on the entropy is well known and has
been used for similar means in [ELMV09, ELMV12].

Double torus quotient invariants. Let T be a rational torus appearing in the
series {Ti }i . We construct new polynomial invariants Ψσ : G(F) → L where
L/F is the splitting field of T. These invariants depend on T and we have
one such invariant for each σ in the absolute Weyl group of T. It is useful to
choose an identification of the Weyl group with the symmetric group Sn and
consider the invariants as parametrized by permutations. The polynomials
Ψσ are invariant under both the left and the right action of T.

Application of Geometric invariant theory. Using GIT we are able to prove
for two torus cosets δL T(A), δR T(A) with δL , δR ∈ G(F) that if for all σ
                            Ψσ (δL −1 δR ) = Ψσ (id)
then necessarily δL T(A) = δR T(A).

Arithmetic properties of the invariants. We show that the invariants Ψσ
satisfy an important arithmetic property. One variant of this result is that
for all non-archimedean places u of F where B is unramified we have that if
δL −1 δR is in an appropriate identity neighborhood in G(Fu ), i.e. satisfy an
integrality condition, then
(3)                    |NrL/F Ψσ (δL −1 δR )|u < Du [L : F]
Where Du is the local discriminant of the homogeneous toral set at the place
u. Moreover, an analogues result holds in the archimedean places. It is here
that we use the maximality assumption for the homogeneous toral set.

Algebraic relations between the invariants and Galois orbits thereof. We ex-
ploit two more tools: the algebraic relations between the invariants Ψσ for
different σ and the action of Gal(L/F) on each Ψσ . We form a new single
invariant ΨC by taking the product of all the Galois conjugates of a specific
12                               I. KHAYUTIN

Ψσ0 , where σ0 can be taken as any permutation that has no fixed points.
The resulting invariant takes values in the fixed field F.
   Obviously, NrL/F Ψσ0 is an integral power of ΨC and we can deduce from
inequality (3) a similar inequality for ΨC .
   Under the assumption that Gal(L/F) is 2-transitive we are able to com-
bine our understanding of both the Galois orbits of all the invariants Ψσ
and the algebraic relations between them to show that the equality
                               ΨC (δL −1 δR ) = 0
is enough to deduce that Ψσ (δL −1 δR ) = Ψσ (id) for all σ ∈ Sn .

Using the invariants to study thin tubes. At this point we have most of the
tools to apply the method described in the fist step. We study the value
of ΨC on pairs of translated cosets δL T(A)g, δR T(A)g that lie in the same
thin tube. By choosing our tube carefully in all the places we are able to
insure that the integrality conditions required for (3) hold. Hence we have
a bound on the absolute value of ΨC (δL −1 δR ) in every place u in terms of
the local discriminant Du .
   Moreover, at the single place u
                                 b where the tube is contracted we can given
an exponentially good bound on the u     b absolute value of ΨC (δL −1 δR ) for
pairs of cosets as above. The rate of this exponential bound affects critically
the final bound on the entropy. Here we use 2-transitivity of the Galois
group again in conjugation with the fact that we chose σ0 to be without
fixed points to optimize this rate.
   We multiply the bounds for all the places of F to have a bound on the
adelic norm of ΨC (δL −1 δR ) in terms of the global discriminant and the
exponential decay at the single place. By pushing the exponential bound
far enough in comparison with the global discriminant term we can decrease
the bound on the norm below 1. But ΨC (δL −1 δR ) ∈ F, viz. it is a rational
number, hence if it has norm smaller then 1 then it is equal to 0. Combining
the previous statements we conclude that a tube which has been contracted
long enough must include a single coset at most. This implies immediately
a bound on the tube’s measure.

1.9. Organization of the paper. In §2, we review the concept of homoge-
neous toral sets in reductive linear algebraic groups and discuss their volume
and discriminant data.
   In §3 we construct the double quotient of a reductive linear group by
a torus and study elementary properties of the quotient using geometric
invariant theory.
   In §4 we present the canonical generators for the double quotient of SLn
and PGLn by the maximal diagonal torus and analyze the algebraic rela-
tions between them.
   In §5 we review the relation between the canonical generators of PGL2
and the discriminant inner product used by Linnik and Skubenko.
                         DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                              13

   In §6 we use the results of §4 to construct canonical generators for a
general rational torus in a groups isogenous to the projective group of units
of a central simple algebra. Notably, we study the Galois orbits of the values
of canonical generators.
   In §7 we prove arithmetic results relating the denominators of values of
canonical generators for central simple algebras with the discriminant data
of homogeneous toral sets.
   In §8 we show that values of canonical generators decay exponentially in
contracting Bowen balls and prove the entropy lower bound.
   In §9 we combine the results of §8 with the measure rigidity theorems of
[EKL06, EL15] to derive a statement about possible limit measures for a
sequence of packets.

1.10. Acknowledgments. This paper is part of the author’s PhD thesis
conducted at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem under the guidance of Prof.
E. Lindenstrauss, to whom I am grateful for introducing me to homogeneous
dynamics and number theory, and for many helpful discussions and insights.
I would like to express my gratitudes to Akshay Venkatesh for encouraging
and valuable conversations. I thank Philippe Michel and Menny Aka for
helpful comments on a preliminary version of this manuscript. I am grateful
to the referees for suggestions that greatly improved the presentation of the
paper.
   Work on this project began during the MSRI program ”Geometric and
Arithmetic Aspects of Homogeneous Dynamics” in 2015. It is a pleasure
to thank MSRI and the organizers for the program and for the institute’s
hospitality.
   Last but not least, I would like to thank my wife, Olga Kalantarov Hautin,
for her unconditional support during the preparation of this paper.
   The author has been supported by the European Research Council [AdG
Grant 267259] throughout his PhD studies.


                         2. The General Setting
2.1. Algebraic Groups and Adeles. Let G be a reductive linear algebraic
group defined over a number field F. Our objects of study are collections
of periodic orbits of a maximal torus in G on an S-arithmetic quotient.
Specifically, we study packets of periodic torus orbits as defined in [ELMV11],
cf. §1.5.
   For each place u of F denote by Fu the completion of F at u. We denote
by VF , VF,∞ and VF,f the set of all places on F, the set of all archimedean
places and the set of all non-archimedean places respectively. For u non-
archimedean we write | · |u to be the canonical absolute value on Fu , i.e.
|̟|u = q −1 where ̟ is a uniformizer for the ring of integers of Fu and q is
the size of the residue field. For u archimedean | · |u is the standard absolute
value on R or C.
14                               I. KHAYUTIN

   The choice for a norm in a complex place is slightly non-standard. For
the product formula to hold we will consider conjugate complex embeddings
as distinct places, although they define the same norm. The upside of this
choice is that we will treat real and complex places uniformly.
   Let S be a finite set of places of F including all the infinite ones. Denote
by A the adele ring of F and let AS ⊂ A beQthe set of adeles having zero
v-component for each v ∈ S. Set also FS := u∈S Fu , then A = FS × AS .
   We always treat F as diagonally embedded in A, AS and FS . Similarly,
for an affine algebraic variety V defined over F, we treat V(F) as diagonally
embedded in V(A) and V(FS ). The spaces V(A) and V(FS ) inherit a locally
compact Hausdorff topology from the standard topology on A and FS .
   For a field extension M/F and an algebraic variety V defined over F we
denote by VM the base change of V to M. In scheme theoretic language
VM := V ×Spec F Spec M. As all the main varieties we deal with are affine
ones, the base change can be described completely by the transformation of
the ring of regular functions M[VM ] := F[V] ⊗F M.
                                                                   Q
2.2. S-Arithmetic and Adelic Quotients. Denote GS := u∈S G(Fu ).
We are interested in the locally homogeneous space XS := Γ\GS for a con-
gruence lattice Γ := G(F) ∩ K S where K S is a compact-open subgroup in
G(AS ) and the intersection takes place in G(AS ).
   This space can be naturally identified with the identity component of a
factor space of the adelic quotient X := G(F)\G(A). We have the obvious
right action of GS on XK S = G(F)\G(A)/K S . By a theorem of Borel, the
finiteness of class number, the double quotient G(F)\G(A)/K S G is finite
                                                                      S
[Bor63, Theorem 5.1] (see also [Con12]). In particular XS can be identified
with the identity component of XK S .

2.3. Discriminant and Volume. Recall from the introduction that a ho-
mogeneous toral set is a closed subset of X of the form

                      Y := G(F)T(A)gA ⊂ G(F)\G(A)

where T < G a maximal torus defined and anisotropic over F and gA ∈ G(A).
If gA = (gu )u∈VF , then for each place u we can define over Fu the torus
Hu = gu −1 TFu gu . The homogeneous toral set is invariant under the action
of the geometric torus Hu (Fu ) for each u.
   The homogeneous toral set can be identified with T(F)\T(A). Because T
is anisotropic over F, the subgroup T(F) is a lattice in T(A). In particular,
      T(A) carries a unique probability measure invariant under T(A).
T(F)\
   The volume and discriminant of a homogeneous toral set have been de-
fined in [ELMV11, §§4.2–4.3]. We reproduce these definitions here for con-
venience’s sake.
                          DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                            15

2.3.1. Volume. This definition depends on a fixed pre-compact identity neigh-
borhood K ⊂ G(A). Let µT be the Haar measure on T such that the volume
of T(F)\T(A) is 1, then one defines

                                                             −1
                  vol(Y ) = µT t ∈ T(A) | gA −1 tgA ∈ K

The different values of the volume for different sets K are comparable up
to
Q constants dependingQ on these sets only. It is convenient to choose K =
       K  such that        K  = K S.
   u∈VF u              u6∈S u



2.3.2. Discriminant Data. The discriminant data is composed of a local dis-
criminant Du for each place u of F. For u non-archimedean Du ∈ q Z where
q is the size of the residue field of Fu . For u archimedean Du ∈ R>0 .
   Let g be the Lie algebra of G, t the Lie algebra of T and hu = Ad(gu −1 )tFu
the Lie algebra of Hu = gu −1 TFu gu . Notice that hu is only defined over Fu .
                                                      V
   Set r to be the absolute rank of G and let V := ( r g)⊗2 . This is an affine
space defined over F. To define the local discriminant we need to make a
choice of a good Goldman-Iwahori norm k · ku on V(Fu ) for all places u. See
the discussion at [ELMV11, §7] regarding norms.
   These norms must satisfy a compatibility condition which says that for
almost all non-archimedean u the unit ball of the norm coincides with the
closure of a fixed OF lattice in V(F).
   The subspace hu (Fu ) < g(Fu ) defines a point in V(Fu ) by a variant of the
Plücker embedding

                                                                      −1
             xhu := (f1 ∧ . . . ∧ fr )⊗2 · det (B(fi , fj ))1≤i,j≤n
                                                                      u


Where f1 , . . . , fr is a base for hu (Fu ) and B is the Killing form.
   The local discriminant   Q is then defined to be Du = kxhu ku . The global
discriminant is D := u∈VF Du . Notice that the local discriminant is an
invariant of Hu .

Remark 2.1. In many classical cases the archimedean discriminant is uni-
formly bounded for the homogeneous toral sets in question so it doesn’t
play a role.
   When studying periodic orbits of a fixed split torus H over R with F = Q
as in [ELMV12, ELMV09] we have H∞ = H and the archimedean discrimi-
nant is constant.
   When studying the points on the 2-sphere and modular analogues in
[Lin68, EMV13] all the archimedean tori H∞ in the associated homogeneous
toral sets are conjugate through elements of a compact group. Hence the
archimedean discriminant is uniformly bounded.
16                                I. KHAYUTIN

     3. Geometric Invariant Theory of a Double Quotient by a
                               Torus
   In this part we construct and study the double quotient of a reductive
linear algebraic G group by a torus T. To any two orbits of T on G we are
able to attach a point on the double quotient space.
   The gist of the current section is a characterization of all the pairs of T-
orbits which have the trivial point attached to them in the double quotient
space.

3.1. Preliminaries. Let G be a reductive linear algebraic group defined
over a characteristic 0 field F and let F be an algebraic closure. Take T < G
to be a non-trivial torus defined over F. We always denote by e the identity
element of groups when written in multiplicative form.
   Recall that for a torus H defined over F we can form the character group
X • (H) = HomF (H, Gm ) and the cocharacter group X• (H) = HomF (Gm , H).
Those are free abelian groups whose rank is equal to the absolute rank of
H. The character and cocharacter groups come with a natural perfect pair-
ing h, i : X • (H) × X• (H) → End(Gm ) ≃ Z defined by the composition of
a character with a cocharacter. We have an action of the absolute Galois
group Gal(F/F) on X • (H), X• (H) making them Galois modules. In partic-
ular X • (H)Gal(F/F) , X• (H)Gal(F/F) are the groups of characters, respectively
cocharacters, defined over F.

3.2. Synopsis. For convenience’s sake we briefly summarize the results of
this chapter. The main tools in proving the following statements are the
Geometric invariant theory of Mumford [MFK94] and Kempf’s work on the
numerical criteria for stability of orbits [Kem78].
    (1) There exists an affine algebraic variety defined over F, T\\G//T, and
        an F-morphism π : G → T\\G//T which is equivariant with respect
        to the left and right actions of T on G.
    (2) The variety T\\G//T can be realized explicitly by choosing a generating
        set Ψ1 , . . . , Ψm in the ring of regular function on G which are invari-
        ant under both the left and the right action of T. Using the generat-
        ing functions we define a closed morphism Ψ = (Ψ1 , . . . , Ψm ) : G →
        Am . The image of Ψ is isomorphic to T\\G//T. This isomorphism
        conjugates Ψ to π.
    (3) For each λ ∈ G(F) such that π(λ) = π(e) we have λ ∈ T(F).
   The last result is used heavily in what follows. We are able to prove that
if two torus orbits δL T(A) and δR T(A) with δL , δR ∈ G(F) from the same
homogeneous toral set come too close to each other then π(δL −1 δR ) = π(e).
The result quoted above insures us that in this case they must actually be
the same orbit. This is exactly the well-separateness property required to
prove our entropy inequality.
                         DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                            17

3.3. Construction and Zariski Closed Orbits. To define the affine al-
gebraic variety T\\G//T we start by looking at the action of the algebraic
torus T × T on G defined by (tL , tR ).g = tL gtR −1 . This is an algebraic
action of a reductive algebraic group T × T on an affine algebraic variety
G. Let TF[G]T be the ring of regular function on G which are invariant
under both the left and the right action of T. By a result of Hilbert this is
a finitely generated algebra over F as T × T is reductive.
   The GIT quotient is defined by T\\G//T := Spec TF[G]T . This is an affine
algebraic variety defined over F because TF[G]T is finitely generated. This
variety comes with a natural T×T-equivariant F-morphism π : G → T\\G//T
which is induced by the inclusion map TF[G]T ֒→ F[G].
   The following theorem is a classical result of Mumford’s theory for GIT
quotients in the affine case.
Theorem 3.1 ([MFK94]). T\\G//T is a universal categorical quotient. In
particular the following holds
    (1) π is surjective.
    (2) Each fiber of π contains a unique Zariski closed orbit. 
    (3) For a field extension L/F denote by GL and T\\G//T L the corre-
                                                                     
         sponding varieties after base change. Then GL → T\\G//T L is a
         categorical quotient for the TL × TL action.
Proof. See [MFK94, §1.2] and [PV94, §4.4].                                 
   A significant complication is that the T × T action on G necessarily
has non Zariski closed orbits of F-points. As a consequence this is not a
geometric quotient and such a quotient does not exist, at least not for the
whole variety G.
   A main tool for studying the Zariski closure of orbits are cocharacters of
the acting group T × T, also called multiplicative 1-parameter subgroups.
Those are morphisms Gm → T × T. We cite the following important result
of Kempf building upon the work of Mumford and Hilbert (see also [MFK94,
Chapter 2]).
Definition 3.2. Fix a separated scheme X. Let r : Gm → X be a morphism.
We say that limτ →0 r(τ ) exists and equals to a point x of X if r can be
extended to a morphism A1 → X and x is the image of the origin.
Proposition 3.3. [Kem78, Corollary 4.3] Let H be a connected reductive
algebraic group acting on an affine scheme X. Let S be a closed H-invariant
subscheme of X. Let x be an F-point of X and assume that S meets the
Zariski closure of the orbit Hx. Then there exists a cocharacter λ of H
                                 Zar
defined over F such that S ∩ Hx      contains the F-point limτ →0 λ(τ )x.
Corollary 3.4. [Kem78, Remark, p.314] If H has no non-trivial cocharac-
ters defined over F then the H-orbit of any F-point of X is Zariski closed.
   Notice that although the notion of limit in Proposition 3.3 is defined
algebraically, because of [Kem78, Lemma 1.2], for an affine algebraic variety
18                               I. KHAYUTIN

X and a local field F the algebraic definition of the limit coincides with limit
in the Hausdorff topology induced from the topology on the field.
Example 3.5. Let B = T ⋉ U be a Borel subgroup defined over F and
containing T and let n ∈ NG (T)(F). The double torus orbit of x = nu for
any u ∈ U(F), u 6= e, is not Zariski closed.
Proof. We will show that n is in the Zariski closure of O := T(F)xT(F) but
                                          Zar
n 6∈ O because u 6= e. This will prove O       6= O.
   Recall that for any Borel subgroup B′ containing the torus T there is
always a cocharacter of T, λ ∈ X• (T), such that for any character α ∈ X • (T)
we have hλ, αi > 0 if and only if α is a positive character relative to B′ . Let
λ ∈ X• (T) be such cocharacter relative to B− , i.e. hλ, αi < 0 if and only if
α is a positive character relative B. Now (nλn−1 , λ) is cocharacter of T × T
and
                                                  h            i
(4)             lim nλ(τ )n−1 xλ(τ )−1 = n lim λ(τ )uλ(τ )−1
               τ →0                           τ →0
                           h             i
   We claim that limτ →0 λ(τ )uλ(τ )−1 = e as required. To see that use
the fact that U is generated by the the 1-parameter unipotent subgroups
Uα for positive characters α and decompose u into a product of 1-parameter
unipotents. For each 1-parameter unipotent Uα there is an isomorphism ǫα :
Ga → Uα such that tǫα (s)t−1 = ǫα (α(t)s) for all t ∈ T(F) and all s ∈ Ga (F). 
In particular for the cocharacter λ it holds λ(τ )ǫα (s)λ(τ )−1 = ǫα thλ,αi s
which tends to 0 for all s if and only if hλ, αi < 0. Hence the claim follows
by choosing λ as in (4).                                                      
   In the following we are mainly interested in double torus orbits of rational
points g ∈ G(F) for a torus T anisotropic F, those points always have Zariski
closed double torus orbit.
Proposition 3.6. Assume T is anisotropic over F then the double torus
orbit of any g ∈ G(F) is Zariski closed.
Proof. By Corollary 3.4 it is enough to show that T × T has no cocharacter
over F, viz. that the F-cocharacter group X• (T × T)Gal(F/F) is trivial. This
is equivalent to X• (T)Gal(F/F) being trivial. But for a torus the pairing h, i
between characters and cocharacters is perfect and Galois equivariant, hence
this is the same as T being anisotropic over F.                             

3.4. Projections to The Identity. Our argument is going to use only
very rudimentary properties of the general theory of double torus quotients.
We need only to understand which rational points have the same image in
T\\G//T as the identity.
   Much stronger results can be proved using Galois cohomology about the
rational points in the fiber of π over any rational point in the double torus
quotient. Unfortunately, difficulties in subsequent parts of the argument,
                             DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                                    19

specifically in counting integral points in T\\G//T, stop us from exploiting
such results.
Proposition 3.7. Assume that T is anisotropic over F. Then for any
g ∈ G(F) such that π(g) = π(e) we have that g ∈ T(F).
Proof. Proposition 3.6 implies that both TgT and TeT are Zariski closed.
The latter orbit is actually equal to T.
  Theorem 3.1 says that there is a unique Zariski closed orbit over π(e),
hence T = TeT = TgT. In particular, over an algebraically closed field F
we have T(F) = T(F)gT(F). That is there exist t0 , tL , tR ∈ T(F) such that
                         t0 = tL gtR −1 =⇒ g = tL −1 t0 tR
Hence g ∈ T(F) ∩ G(F) = T(F).                                                          

            4. Double Torus Quotient for SLn and PGLn
   Let F be a number field. We treat the matrix algebra Mn and the asso-
ciated linear algebraic groups GLn , PGLn and SLn as defined over F. We
denote by h : SLn → PGLn the standard isogeny between these groups.

4.1. Canonical Generators for Standard Tori. Let Diag < Mn be the
commutative subalgebra of diagonal matrices and denote A = GL1 (Diag).
Define SA := SL1 (Diag) to be the subgroup of diagonal matrices of deter-
minant 1 and let PA := PGL1 (Diag) to be the full diagonal torus of PGLn .
The groups PA and SA are maximal tori in the corresponding groups split
over F .
   We build a specific set of generators for PAF[PGLn ]PA and SAF[SLn ]SA
which provides us with a description in coordinates of both PA\\PGLn//PA
and SA\\SLn//SA.

4.1.1. Double Torus Quotient for the Variety of Matrices. Let Mn be the
affine algebraic variety of n×n matrices, with xi,j ∈ F[Mn ], 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n, the
function attaching to a matrix its (i, j) entry. In this form the coordinate
ring of Mn is the polynomial algebra R := F[xi,j ]1≤i,j≤n . The algebraic
group SA × SA acts on Mn . The the first copy of SA in the product
acts by the standard left action and the second copy by the standard right
action. The closed embedding SLn → Mn is obviously equivariant under
this action.
   Our first step is to describe R0 := SARSA , the ring of regular function on
SA\\Mn//SA. This ring is generated by those polynomials P ∈ R which are
invariant under the SA × SA action.
   All the following calculations are executed over a characteristic 0 alge-
braically closed field. When an n × n matrix is multiplied on the left by
λ = diag (λ1 , . . . , λn ) and on the right by the inverse of µ = diag (µ1 , . . . , µn )
its (i, j) coordinate is multiplied by λiµj , i.e. (λ, µ).xi,j = λiµj xi,j .
20                                  I. KHAYUTIN

     A polynomial in P ∈ R is of the form
                                X        Y  M
                          P =       bM     xi,ji,j
                                 M       1≤i,j≤n

Where M runs over a finite set of monomials, and Mi,j is the power of
xi,j in the M -monomial. We identify M = (Mi,j )1≤i,j≤n with a matrix of
non-negative integers. Denote
               P
      • Mi := 1≤j≤n Mi,j - the sum of the columns in row i.
                P
      • M j := 1≤i≤n Mi,j - the sum of the rows in column j.
   We see that the double torus action on P takes the form
                                                 −1
                  X        Y              Y       j
                                                          Y   M
       (λ, µ).P =    bM        λi Mi       µj M          xi,ji,j
                    M       1≤i≤n           1≤j≤n           1≤i,j≤n

   In particular the SA × SA actions sends monomials to monomials. If the
polynomial P is invariant, then because the polynomial algebra is free and
the action conserves monomials we must have that each monomial appearing
in P is invariant. This implies that R0 is generated by invariant monomials.
For such an invariant monomial with power matrix M we must have for all
diagonal matrices λ, µ with determinant 1
                                               −1
                        Y              Y        j
(5)                        λi M i        µj M  = 1
                        1≤i≤n           1≤j≤n
                                            Q
The only relation between the λi ’s is 1≤i≤n λi = 1 and the same hold
for the µj ’s. Equality (5) can hold if and only if for all 1 ≤ i1 , i2 ≤ n:
Mi1 = Mi2 and for all 1 ≤ j1 , j2 ≤ n: M j1 = M j2 . A matrix M of
non-negative integers all whose rows sum to the same value and all whose
columns P  sum to the sameP value is called a semi-magic square. Notice that
because 1≤i≤n Mi = 1≤j≤n M j the value must be the same for the rows
and the columns.
   It is a classical result of D. König that each semi-magic square is a sum of
permutation matrices [Kön16] (see also the exposition [LM99]). An imme-
diate consequence is that R0 is generated by the monomials corresponding
to permutation matrices. The discussion above sums to the proof of the
following.
Proposition 4.1. The ring R0 = SAF[Mn ]SA is generated by the monomi-
als                                  Y
                       Ψ0σ := sign σ   xσ(i),i
                                          1≤i≤n
for σ ∈ Sn .
Remark 4.2. There are many relations between these generators. In partic-
ular notice that we have n! generators, but SA\\Mn//SA has a Zariski open
subset of dimension n2 − 2(n − 1). This is the set of stable points - the points
                        DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                            21

that have a Zariski closed orbit and trivial stabilizer. Nevertheless, R0 is
finitely presented and we can describe all the relations explicitly.
4.1.2. Passing from Mn to SLn . We recall the definition of the determinant
using the Leibniz formula
                        X          n
                                   Y           X
                 det :=   sign σ ·   xσ(i),i =     Ψ0σ ∈ R
                       σ∈Sn        i=1         σ∈Sn

This is a homogeneous polynomial of degree n. Denote by I := hdet − 1i
the principal ideal in R generated by det − 1. The definition of the special
linear group implies F[SLn ] = RI .
                                                     SA      SA
   We are interested in the ring of invariants RI :=       R
                                                              I     . Define
                                                   0
I0 := I ∩ R0 . We have an injective homomorphism of F-algebras R0I0 ֒→
     
  R . The following lemma which appears in the work of Nagata [Nag64,
     I 0
Lemma 5.1.A] implies that this homomorphism is actually an isomorphism
(see also [Dol03, Lemma 3.5]).
Lemma 4.3 (Nagata). Let a linearly reductive algebraic group H act on
the F-algebras S and S ′ for a field F. Assume everything is defined over F.
If φ : S → S ′ is an H-equivariant F-homomorphism onto S ′ , then induced
homomorphism S H → S ′ H is onto.
                                                    
Corollary 4.4. The homomorphism R0I0 ֒→ RI              is an isomorphism.
                                                      0
This allows us to identify hereon R0I0 ≃ RI .
                                               0
   In particular RI is generated by Ψ0σ | σ ∈ Sn and we can describe
                         0
SA  \\SL n /
           / SA in coordinate form by the image of Ψ : SLn → A(n!) defined
             0
by Ψ = Ψσ σ∈Sn where we have fixed an arbitrary order on Sn .
                                                      R
                         to the homomorphism R → I shows that
Proof. Applying the lemma
the homomorphism R0 → RI is onto, but this homomorphism factors
                               0            
through R0I0 . This shows that R0I0 → RI     is bijective hence an
                                              0
isomorphism.                                                        
4.1.3. Passing from SLn to PGLn . The isogeny h : SLn → PGLn restricts
to an isogeny of maximal tori
                              h↾SA : SA → PA
Using h we can let SA × SA act on the affine algebraic variety PGLn to
form the double quotient SA\\PGLn//SA. Surjectivity of h↾SA implies that
                    SA\\PGLn//SA = PA\\PGLn//PA
From now on we identify those spaces.
22                                  I. KHAYUTIN

   Next we use the surjectivity of the full isogeny h. The morphism h induces
a surjective morphism SA\\SLn//SA → PA\\PGLn//PA. This morphism in-
tertwines the SA actions and it is the unique morphism having this property,
as follows from the categorical properties of the quotient.
   Because of the duality between affine algebraic varieties over F and finitely
generated reduced algebras over F we have an injective algebra homomor-
phism
                       PA
                          F[PGLn ]PA ֒→ SAF[SLn ]SA
   In particular, if one can demonstrate a set of elements in PAF[PGLn ]PA
whose image in SAF[SLn ]SA generates the latter ring, then those elements
must generate the former ring. We will find such regular functions on PGLn
that are equal to the Ψ0σ ’s when restricted to the image of SLn .
   To represent PGLn as an affine algebraic variety we use the adjoint repre-
sentation which is a closed immersion PGLn → GLn (Mn ). Notably, every
regular function on GLn (Mn ) induces a regular function on PGLn . Hence,
all we need to do is to exhibit regular functions on GLn (Mn ) such that when
restricted to the image of SLn through the adjoint representation they would
be equal to the Ψ0σ ’s.
   This is easy enough to do if we rewrite Ψσ in a slightly more intrinsic way.
For 1 ≤ i ≤ n let e0i = diag(0, . . . , 0, 1, 0, . . . , 0) be the diagonal matrix with
a single 1 entry in the (i, i) place. Then for g ∈ SLn (F)
                             n
                                            !                n
                                                                              !
                           X                               X
             0                  0         0                     0          0
            Ψσ (g) = det       eσ(i) g ei = det                eσ(i) Adg (ei )
                              i=1                     i=1

The latter expression can be easily extended to a regular function on the vari-
ety GLn (Mn ) by considering a general linear transformation on Mn instead
of Adg . Those regular functions would necessarily generate PAF[PGLn ]PA
as required. We sum up these results in the following proposition.
Proposition 4.5. The ring PAF[PGLn ]PA is generated by the following
regular functions, which by abuse of notation we also denote by Ψ0σ
                       n
                                          !      n
                                                               !
                     X                           X
(6)    Ψ0σ (g) = det     e0σ(i) Adg (e0i ) = det   e0σ(i) g e0i · (det g)−1
                        i=1                           i=1

For any [g] ∈ PGLn (F) and all σ ∈ Sn . In expression (6) we have treated g
as a matrix representing a point in PGLn .
   Notice that this definition of Ψ0σ for PGLn recovers the original functions
  0
Ψσ for SLn through the homomorphism F[PGLn ] → F[SLn ].
   Moreover, the homomorphism PAF[PGLn ]PA ֒→ SAF[SLn ]SA is an iso-
morphism of F-algebras, i.e. SA\\SLn//SA ∼  = PA\\PGLn//PA. In particular,
                             0
the relations between the Ψσ ’s for PGLn are the same as for SLn .
   From now on, unless stated otherwise, we write the (det g)−1 factor and
its analogues even when treating SLn . In that case it should be viewed as
                           DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                               23

the constant function 1. In any case, we can always consider the functions
Ψ0σ as functions on GLn .
4.2. Relations between the Canonical Generators. We present two
different results regarding the relations between the canonical generators.
The first one is specially adapted to our needs and is restricted to the ques-
tion of when one canonical generator being equal to zero implies that another
generator is also zero. In the second part we describe explicitly a complete
set of relations between the generators.
Proposition 4.6. To each σ ∈ Sn we attach the roots set.
                    Rσ := {(σ(i), i) | 1 ≤ i ≤ n, σ(i) 6= i}
We say that a subset C ⊆ Sn has a complete set of roots if
                   [
                       Rσ = {(j, i) | 1 ≤ j, i ≤ n, i 6= j}
                     σ∈C
Notice that if F < Sn is a 2-transitive subgroup then for every σ 6= id the
subset τ στ −1 | τ ∈ F has a complete set of roots.
   If for g ∈ GLn (F) there exists σ ∈ Sn such that σ has no fixed points and
Ψ0σ (g) = 0 then in every subset C ⊆ Sn which has a complete set of roots
one can find τ ∈ C such that Ψ0τ (g) = 0.
   The connection between a root set to the roots of a maximal torus in an
algebraic group is presented in §8.
Proof. We write g inQmatrix form (gi,j )1≤i,j≤n , viz. xi,j (g) = gi,j . Recall
that Ψ0σ (g) := sign σ 1≤i≤n gσ(i),i · (det g)−1 . Hence if Ψ0σ (g) = 0 then there
exists 1 ≤ i0 ≤ n such that gσ(i0 ),i0 = 0 and σ(i0 ) 6= i0 .
  For every τ ∈ Sn such that τ (i0 ) = σ(i0 ) we have Ψ0τ (g) = 0. In every
subset C ⊆ Sn that has a complete set of roots one can find such τ ∈ C and
the proposition follows.                                                        
4.2.1. Complete Description of the Relations. The results in the second part
of this section are presented mainly for the sake of completeness as they do
not play a direct role in what follows. Nevertheless, the relations between
the generators are a key part of our argument albeit only in the form of
Proposition 4.6 and not in the explicit form presented here.
Renormalization of the canonical generators. We wish first to describe the
relations between the canonical generators in R0 = SAF[Mn ]SA . Here we
work with a different normalization for generators of R0
                             Yn            Y     Pσ
(7)                    Ψ1σ =    xi,σ(i) =       xi,ji,j
                               i=1          1≤i,j≤n

Where P σ ∈ Mn (Z) is the standard permutation matrix associated to σ ∈
Sn . Notice the lack of the twist by the determinant as currently we just
study R0 .
24                                 I. KHAYUTIN

   We can easily recover the original canonical generators from Proposition
4.1 using Ψ0σ = sign σ Ψ1σ−1 .

The composition map. Any possible relation can be expressed as
                              Q(Ψ1σ )σ∈Sn = 0
for a polynomial Q ∈ F[yσ ]σ∈Sn with {yσ }σ∈Sn formal variables.
   We can define the composition map CΨ : F[yσ ]σ∈Sn → R = F[Mn ] for any
polynomial Q ∈ F[yσ ]σ∈Sn by CΨ (Q) = Q(Ψ1σ )σ∈Sn . This composition is an
element of R0 and hence and element of R. This map is an F-homomorphism
between F-algebras. The relations in the ring R0 correspond to ker CΨ which
is an ideal of F[yσ ]σ∈Sn . By Hilbert’s Basis Theorem ker CΨ is finitely gen-
erated, hence R0 is finitely presented. We now turn to describe explicitly a
set of generating relations.

Reduction to monomials. Because all the polynomials Ψ1σ for σ ∈ Sn are
monomials we have that CΨ maps monomials to monomials. Each Q ∈
ker CΨ can be written in the following form
                               X           X
(8)                 Q=                        bS S
                          P ∈Monomials(R) S∈CΨ −1 (P )

Where we have grouped all the monomials appearing in Q by their CΨ -image
in R.
   Because R is a free polynomial algebra CΨ (Q) = 0 if and only if
                               X
                                      bS P = 0
                             S∈CΨ −1 (P )

    each P appearing in the decomposition of Q in (8). This is the same
for P
as S∈CΨ −1 (P ) bS = 0 for each such P . Hence ker CΨ is generated by ele-
                        P
ments of the form Q = S∈CΨ −1 (P ) bS S for a fixed monomial P ∈ R with
P
   S∈CΨ −1 (P ) bS = 0.
                                                          −1
   We consider (bS )S as a vector in the vector space FCΨ (P ) . This vector
is contained in the subspace of vectors whose sum is zero. This subspace
is spanned by vectors with a single +1 entry and a single −1 and the rest
of the entries equal to 0. Thus ker CΨ is generated by elements of the form
S1 − S2 for two monomials in F[yσ ]σ∈Sn such that CΨ (S1 ) = CΨ (S2 ).

Translation to permutation
                  Q                    Q S1 , S2 ∈ F[yσ ]σ∈Sn be two mono-
                           matrices. Let
mials. Write S1 = σ∈Sn yσaσ and S2 = σ∈Sn yσbσ . Then CΨ (S1 ) = CΨ (S2 )
if and only if
                           X
                              (aσ − bσ )P σ = 0
                            σ∈Sn

   Let cσ = aσ − bσ and define a0σ := max(cσ , 0) and b0σ := max(−cσ , 0) for
                      Q      a0           Q         b0
all σ ∈ Sn . Let S10 = σ∈Sn yσσ and S20 = σ∈Sn yσσ . Evidently CΨ (S10 ) =
                          DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                                25

CΨ (S20 ). Moreover, if S10 − S20 is the ideal in F[yσ ]σ∈Sn generated by S10 −S20
then S1 − S2 ∈ S10 − S20 .
   To sum up, the ideal ker CΨ is generated by elements of the form Sf+ =
Q         max(f (σ),0)          Q        max(−f (σ),0)
  σ∈Sn yσ              and Sf− = σ∈Sn yσ               for any function f : Sn →
Z≥0 such that
                                 X
(9)                                  f (σ)P σ = 0
                                σ∈Sn


The group algebra of Sn . The group ring ZSn consists of all function Sn → Z,
it is an order in the group algebra QSn which consists of all the functions
Sn → Q. All the irreducible representation of Sn in characteristic zero
are defined over Q. Moreover, they can be defined over Z, i.e. they are
representations of the form Sn → GLk (Z).
   If (ρ, W ) is a representation of Sn defined over Q we have the Fourier
transform of any f ∈ QSn defined by
                              X
                      fb(ρ) =     f (σ) · ρ(σ) ∈ EndQ (W )
                             σ∈Sn

  Let ρ0 = ρSt ⊕ ρtriv be the direct sum of the standard representation of
Sn with the trivial representation. This is just the representation σ → P σ ∈
GLn (Z) written as a sum of irreducible representations. Condition (9) can
be translated to fb(ρ0 ) = 0.
  Let {(ρi , Wi )}i be the irreducible representation of Sn defined over Z. The
                                                     ∼ L
Fourier transform induces an isomorphism QSn −       → i EndQ (Wi ). By the
Plancherel formula for the finite Fourier transform condition (9) becomes
the statement that f is orthogonal to the representations ρSt , ρtriv .
  The discussion above constitutes the proof of the following proposition.
Proposition 4.7. The ring SAF[Mn ]SA is generated by the polynomials

  Ψ1σ σ∈Sn . A complete list of relations may be computed in the following
way.
   For each irreducible representation (W, ρ) other then ρSt and ρtriv we look
at EndQ (W ) as a subspace of QSn . Let f1ρ , . . . , fdim
                                                       ρ
                                                           W2
                                                               be a primitive base
for the lattice ZSn ∩ EndQ (W ). Then each base vector defines a relation
                 Y        max(fiρ (σ),0)   Y       max(−fiρ (σ),0)
                      Ψ1σ                 =   Ψ1σ
                σ∈Sn                      σ∈Sn

Remark 4.8. Notice that the dimension of the maximal component of the
variety SA\\Mn//SA is n2 − (n − 1)− (n − 1) = n2 − 2n + 2. We have |Sn | = n!
generators for the ring and the amount of relations is dim QSn − dim ρSt 2 −
dim ρtriv 2 = n!−(n−1)2 −1. The difference
                                        between the amount    of generators
                                                                         
                                                           2
and the amount of relations is |Sn | − dim QSn − dim ρSt − dim ρtriv 2 =
n2 − 2n + 2 which is equal to the above mentioned dimension.
26                               I. KHAYUTIN

Corollary 4.9. The ring SAF[SLn ]SA is generated by the regular functions

  Ψ1σ σ∈Sn from the Proposition 4.7 with the same relations and the addi-
tional Leibniz relation      X
                                sign σΨ1σ = 1
                              σ∈Sn

Proof. This follows from Proposition 4.7 and 4.4.                           

                5. Double Torus Quotient for PGL2
   In this part we demonstrate the connection between the canonical gener-
ators of PA\\PGL2//PA over F = Q and the discriminant inner product of
integral binary quadratic forms. This section is not formally required for the
development of our results, yet it serves as a motivation to the study of the
double quotient of a group by a torus. Moreover, we stress some inherent
differences between PGL2 and higher rank cases.
   The action of PGL2 on the the space of binary quadratic forms and its
relation to class groups of quadratic fields is very well known and goes back
to Gauss and Dirichlet. This is an extremely rich subject. We present a
very concise introduction suited to our needs.
   A close variant of this action has been exploited by Linnik to prove his
result regarding equidistribution of integral points in the 2-sphere. A central
tool in his method is the study of inner product between two forms.

5.1. Binary Quadratic Forms and the Adjoint Action. We denote by
Q the space of binary quadratic forms. The action of PGL2 on Q is induced
from the action of GL2 on 2-vectors
                                         1
                         g.q(x, y) =         q((x, y)g)
                                       det g
   Denote the Lie algebra of PGL2 by pgl2 . We identify pgl2 with M02 the
space of 2 × 2 trace-free matrices. One can define in the following way an
isomorphism over Q between the adjoint representation of PGL2 on pgl2
and the the representation of PGL2 on the space of binary quadratic forms
                                                  
                         2           2      b −2a
(10)                   ax + bxy + cy 7→
                                           2c −b
Being an isomorphism of representations it intertwines the action of PGL2
on binary quadratic forms with the adjoint action on the Lie algebra.
   The ring of invariants for the adjoint action of PGL2 on pgl2 is generated
by a single invariant, the determinant of the matrix. This is an instance
of Chevalley’s restriction theorem. The pullback of the determinant under
the isomorphism of pgl2 with Q is a multiple of the discriminant of a binary
quadratic form. Specifically, we have an isomorphism of quadratic spaces
                         (Q, disc) ←→ (pgl2 , −det)
                          DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                                27

5.2. Stabilizers of a Binary Quadratic Form. The stabilizer in PGL2
of a non-degenerate rational binary quadratic form q is the centralizer of a
non-trivial regular element in pgl2 (Q), hence it is a maximal torus T defined
over Q.
   The torus T is anisotropic over Q if and only if q is irreducible over Q.
Moreover it is split over R if and only if q is reducible over R, i.e. disc(q) > 0.
   Rational forms q and q ′ are homothetic if ∃α ∈ Q× such that q = αq ′ .
The correspondence between homothety classes of non-degenerate rational
binary quadratic forms and rational maximal tori is a bijection. We have
already seen how to attach a rational maximal torus to a quadratic form in
a way which is obviously invariant under homothety. In the other direction,
for a maximal rational torus T its Lie algebra t(Q) is a rational subspace of
g(Q). Using the isomorphism (10) this corresponds to a homothety class of
rational quadratic forms. It is straight forward to see that these maps are
inverse to each other. For example, the standard diagonal torus corresponds
to the homothety class of q0 (x, y) = xy.

5.3. Canonical Generators for PA in PGL2 . Denote by a the Lie alge-
bra of the maximal torus PA < PGL2 . The Weyl group of PA consists of
two elements: the identity element, +1, which acts trivially on a and the
element −1 which acts by negation on a.
   From our study in the previous parts we learn that the canonical gener-
ators for PA \\PGL2//PA are Ψ+1 and Ψ−1 . The algebra of invariants for
the double torus quotient is generated by those polynomials and they are
related by a single relation coming from the Leibniz formula
                                Ψ+1 + Ψ−1 = 1
In particular, the algebra of invariants is PAQ[PGL]PA ∼  = Q[Ψ+1 ], i.e. the
double quotient space is just a one dimensional affine space.
  If we look at the definition of the canonical generators at Proposition 4.1
adding the twist by the determinant for PGL2 we see that
                                             
                a b           1                a b            1
        Ψ+1             =          ad Ψ−1              =−          bc
                c d        ad − bc             c d         ad − bc

5.4. Canonical Generators for a rational torus in PGL2 . Let now
T < PGL2 be any maximal torus defined over Q. Let L/Q be the splitting
field of T, either L = Q and then T = PA or L is a quadratic extension of
Q and then T is anisotropic over Q. In both cases T is conjugate to PA by
an element of PGL2 (L).
   We are going now to construct generators for TL[PGL2 ]T from the func-
tions Ψ+1 and Ψ−1 . This is a simple instance of the construction we carry
out in Proposition 6.3.
   As T is L-split there exists g ∈ PGL2 (L) such that TL = Adg PAL . This
equality defines uniquely the coset of g in PGL2 (L)N              , where
                                                       PGL2 (PA)(L)
28                                 I. KHAYUTIN

NPGL2 (PA) is the normalizer of the split torus PA in PGL2 . We define
                              ΨT
                               ±1 := Ψ±1 ◦ Adg −1

One easily sees by direct computation that ΨT           T
                                              +1 and Ψ−1 are invariant under
the left and right action of TL and that the definition does not depend on
the choice of g up to permuting the two generators.
   More so, the map P 7→ P ◦ Adg−1 defines an isomorphism of L algebras
PAL[PGL ]PA → TL[PGL ]T . If L 6= Q this isomorphism is a priori not
           2                  2
defined over Q as g 6∈ Q. Yet it implies that ΨT              T
                                                    +1 and Ψ−1 generate the
whole ring of left and right TL -invariant regular functions over L.
   What we show in the next section is that although ΨT               T
                                                             +1 and Ψ−1 are
defined initially over L, for any rational point λ ∈ PGL2 (Q) one has that
ΨT±1 (λ) ∈ Q. Moreover, these functions are actually defined over Q.
   Unfortunately, this is no more true for higher rank groups. Neverthe-
less, an analogues statement, Proposition 6.5, regarding the orbits of the
canonical generators under the Galois group Gal(L/Q) still holds.
5.5. Discriminant Inner Product. We have a natural invariant for the
PGL2 action on Q which is the discriminant. Being a quadratic form it is
associated to a bilinear form on Q which is its polarization. We call this
bilinear form the discriminant inner product. Notice that it is not positive
definite yet it is non-degenerate. For two binary quadratic forms this inner
product is evaluated by
         ax2 + bxy + cy 2 , a′ x2 + b′ xy + c′ y 2 disc = bb′ − 2ac′ − 2a′ c
Proposition 5.1. Let qT (x, y) be a quadratic form of discriminant 1 corre-
sponding to the rational torus T < PGL2 . Let δ ∈ G(C) then
                 (det δ)−1 hqT , δ.qT idisc = ΨT         T
                                               +1 (δ) − Ψ−1 (δ)
Proof. First notice that the polynomial map δ 7→ (det δ)−1 hqT , δ · qT idisc is
invariant under both the left and the right action of T.
   To see that the polynomials are actually equal, write T = gPAg−1 with
g ∈ G(C). Let q0 (x, y) = xy be the discriminant 1 binary quadratic form of
the torus PA. We have qT (x, y) = ±g.q0 (x, y). Without loss of generality
the sign in the equality is positive.
   We now reduce the claim to the case T = PA.
         (det δ)−1 hqT , δ.qT idisc = (det gδg−1 )−1 q0 , (g−1 δg).q0 disc
                                   −1           −1
         ΨT         T
          +1 (δ) − Ψ−1 (δ) = Ψ+1 (g δg) − Ψ−1 (g δg)
   For T = PA the claims follows from a direct computation of both expres-
sions.                                                                  
Corollary 5.2. The polynomials ΨT       T
                                +1 and Ψ−1 are defined over Q.
Proof. As qT is a quadratic form over Q and h, idisc is defined over Q we
deduce from the previous proposition that ΨT      T
                                           +1 − Ψ−1 is defined over Q.
  The claim follows by the relation ΨT     T
                                     +1 + Ψ−1 = 1.                      
                         DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                              29

Remark 5.3. In higher rank we do not have an available linear representation
having the same properties as the representation
                                       Vn−1       of PGL2 on Q. The natural
analogue is the action of PGLn on            pgln which is fruitfully exploited
in [ELMV09]. Yet this representation for n > 2 has plenty of lines whose
stabilizer’s identity component is not a maximal torus.
   In what follows we have to study the canonical generators attached to
rational tori without the aid of a linear representation. This is mainly done
using the action of the Galois group of the splitting field on the generators
and the algebraic relations between them.
   We note that Bhargava [Bha04] has discovered a linear representation
of a higher rank group such that the identity components of all the line
stabilizers are tori, although not maximal ones. See also the generalization
by Wood [Woo14].

       6. Double Torus Quotient for Central Simple Algebras
   We are now in position to use the results of the previous parts to study
double torus quotients in groups isogenous to an inner form of PGLn , e.g.
the projective group of units and the group of units of norm 1 in a central
simple algebra.
   Let B be a central simple algebra over F considered as an F-algebra object
in the category of affine algebraic varieties. Denote the reduced norm by
Nrd : B → A1 . When restricted to the group of units, GL1 (B), it is an
F-character.
   Let G be a reductive linear algebraic defined over F with fixed F-isogenies
(11)                     SL1 (B) → G → PGL1 (B)
where PGL1 (B) is the adjoint form and SL1 (B) is the simply-connected
cover. The linear algebraic groups SL1 (B) and PGL1 (B) are inner F-forms
of SLn and PGLn respectively. All inner F-forms of PGLn and SLn arise
this way. See [Ser02, Chapter III, §1.4] for details.
   Let T < G be a maximal torus defined over F. By T we mean an algebraic
torus together with a fixed embedding into G. There is a unique maximal
commutative subalgebra E < B defined over F such that the isogeny (11)
restricts to an isogeny of tori
                                                         ×
                   SL1 (E) → T → PGL1 (E) := Z ×\E
                                                    B
Notice that PGL1 (E) is defined to be the quotient of the units of E by the
center of B× .
   The variety E can be reconstructed from T by identifying the Lie algebra
of B with the traceless quaternions B0 < B and defining E < B to be the
direct sum of Lie T and the one-dimensional space spanned by the identity
in B.
   The ring K := E(F) is an étale-algebra of degree n over F. The torus T
is anisotropic over F if and only if K is a field.
30                                   I. KHAYUTIN

6.1. Double Torus Quotient over a Splitting Field. We do not have
an explicit description of the double torus quotient T\\G//T over F, but as
we will see in this section we can use our description of SA \\SLn // SA to
derive an explicit description of T \\G// T after extending the scalars to a
splitting field of T. In other words, the double torus quotient varieties for
different rational tori T are all F-forms of the standard double torus quotient
SA\\SLn//SA.
   We say that a commutative algebra of degree n over L is split if it is
isomorphic as an algebra to Ln . Denote by L/F the splitting field of T,
equivalently E, i.e. the unique minimal field extension of F over which T,
equivalently E and GL1 (E), split.
   A splitting field for E always splits the central simple algebra as well.
That is there exists an L-isomorphism of algebras φ : BL → Mn,L (see the
discussion in [GS06, §2.2]). The isomorphism φ sends EL to a split maximal
commutative subalgebra in Mn,L . We insure that this subalgebra is the
standard diagonal one by replacing φ with the composition of φ with an
inner automorphism sending φ(EL ) to the standard diagonal subalgebra2,
which we denote by DiagL .
   The isomorphism φ induces isomorphisms
                                 SL1 (B)L → SLn,L
                               PGL1 (B)L → PGLn,L
which we also denote by φ. Moreover, base-changing the fixed isogenies (11)
and composing with these isomorphisms we have fixed isogenies over L
(12)                          SLn,L → GL → PGLn,L
                               SAL → TL → PAL
Using this isogeny we consider every regular function on PGLn,L as a regular
function on GL .
Proposition 6.1. The isogenies (12) induce isomorphisms
                                                      
(13)     SA\\SLn//SA L → T\\G//T L → PA\\PGLn//PA L
Proof. The properties ofthe universal categorical quotient in Theorem 3.1
assure us that T\\G//T L ∼    = TL \\GL//TL and the same holds for PGLn,L
and SLn,L .
   Because the isomorphism in Proposition 4.5 factors through (13) we con-
clude that all the maps in (13) are isomorphisms.                             
                                                               0
   We can now transport using φ our explicit coordinates Ψσ σ∈Sn from
                                                                      0
SA\\SLn//SA to T\\G//T L . We wish to rewrite the polynomials Ψσ using
intrinsic notions similar to §4.1.3. For this we bring the classical definition
of a complete set of primitive orthogonal idempotents.
     2One doesn’t need to work with the standard diagonal subalgebra here, any maximal
commutative subalgebra of Mn,L defined and split over F will do.
                          DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                                31

Definition 6.2. An element of a unital ring e0 ∈ R is called an idempotent
if e20 = e0 . The idempotent e0 is non-trivial if e0 6= 0, 1 and it is primitive if
it cannot be written a sum of two non-trivial idempotents.
   Two idempotents e1 , e2 ∈ R are orthogonal if e1 e2 = e2 e1 = 0. A set of
idempotents e1 , . . . , en ∈ R is called a complete set of primitive orthogonal
idempotents if all the ei ’s are mutually orthogonal primitive idempotents
and 1 = e1 + . . . + en .
   If R is commutative then a complete set of primitive orthogonal idempo-
tents is unique, up to permutation, if it exists.

Proposition 6.3.
    (1) For each 1 ≤ i ≤ n let e0i be the diagonal matrix with all zero entries
        except for a single 1 entry in the (i, i) place.
           A complete
                     setn of primitive orthogonal idempotents for DiagL (L)
        is given by e0i i=1 . The φ−1 image of this set is a complete set of
        primitive orthogonal idempotents in EL (L). Write ei = φ−1 (e0i ) for
        those primitive orthogonal idempotents.
    (2) We identify the absolute Weyl group with symmetric group on the
        ordered complete set of primitive orthogonal idempotents and with the
        standard symmetric group on {1, . . . , n} in a consistent manner. For
        all σ ∈ WT (L) we have eσ(i) = σ.ei . Notice that this identification
        depends on the order of e1, . . . , en .
    (3) The pullback to T\\G//T L of Ψ0σ is

                                      n
                                                         !
                                     X
                      0
           Ψσ (g) := Ψσ ◦ φ (g) = Nrd   (σ.ei )gei           · Nrd(g)−1
                                            i=0

        We call the polynomials {Ψσ }σ∈WT (L) the canonical generators of
                                                 
        the ring of regular functions of T\\G//T L .

Proof. The first two parts of the proposition are straightforward. The third
part follows immediately from the facts that the reduced norm is exactly the
determinant map for the matrix algebra and that φ, being an isomorphism
of central simple algebras, is reduced-norm preserving.                   

   The idempotents e1 , . . . , en ∈ EL := EL (L) form a base for EL as an
L-vector space. One can use other bases for EL to express the canonical
generators. To do this we will need the reduced trace form. The central
simple algebra BL carriers a natural non-degenerate bilinear form, which is
the reduced trace form Trd. This form restricts to a non-degenerate bilinear
form on EL which is just the standard trace form on the étale algebra.

Lemma 6.4. Let b1 , . . . , bn ∈ EL be a basis for EL := EL (L) as an L-vector
space. Let q
           b1 , . . . , qbn the dual basis with respect to the reduced trace, i.e.
32                                             I. KHAYUTIN


Trd(qbi bj ) = δi,j . For any σ in the absolute Weyl group we have
                                               n
                                                                      !
                                               X
                        Ψσ (g) = Nrd                 σ.qbi · g · bi       · Nrd(g)−1
                                               i=1

Proof. For a linear endomorphism ρ ∈ EndL (EL ) denote by ρ† the adjoint
operator with respect to the reduced trace.
   Notice that e1 , . . . , en is an orthonormal basis with respect to the reduced
trace. Hence if (ρi,j )ni,j=1 is the matrix associated to the endomorphism ρ
with respect to the basis e1 , . . . , en , then the matrix associated with ρ† is
just the transposed matrix (ρj,i )ni,j=1 .
   Choose ρ ∈ EndL (E) such that ρ(ei ) = bi for all i = 1, . . . , n, then
                              P
ρ (qbi ) = ei . Write bi = nj=1 ρi,j ej . A calculation now gives
 †

                                                                            !
     n
     X                        n
                              X                  Xn             n
                                                                X    n
                                                                     X
           σ.qbi · g · bi =         σ.qbi · g ·    ρi,j ej  =   σ.   ρi,jqbi · g · ej
     i=1                      i=1                j=1                      j=1      i=1
                              n
                              X                              n
                                                             X
                        =           σ.ρ† (qbi ) · g · ej =         σ.ej · g · ej
                              j=1                            j=1

This concludes the proof.                                                                 


6.2. Galois Action. The splitting field L is always a Galois extension of
the base field F. In this section we study the action of the Galois group
G := Gal (L/F) on the map φ and derive from this the way the Galois group
acts on the algebraic numbers Ψσ (g) for g ∈ G(F).


Galois Descent. We briefly review basic facts from the theory of Galois
descent for affine algebraic varieties in a form useful to us. This theory
is sufficient for our needs as all our varieties are affine. The affine case is
straightforward to verify using the analogues statements for the coordinate
rings.
   Let X be an affine variety defined over F. There is a natural action of
G := Gal (L/F) on the scheme XL by automorphisms. These automorphisms
are not defined over L, as they act non-trivially on Spec L through the Galois
action on L/F. By an abuse of notation we denote the automorphism of XL
induced by σ ∈ G also by σ.
   Given two affine algebraic varieties X, Y defined over F, we have an
induced action of G on MorL (XL , YL ) by f σ := σ ◦ f ◦ σ −1 . If f is an
isomorphism then so is f σ for each σ ∈ G. This action extends to the
arrow category in the following way. If we have the following morphisms of
algebraic varieties over F
                          DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                          33


                                 X′          Y′


                                 X           Y


  Together with additional horizontal morphisms making the following dia-
gram commute
                                       f′
                                X′L          YL′

                                       f
                                XL           YL


  Then the following diagram commutes for each σ ∈ G
                                      f ′σ
                                X′L          YL′

                                       fσ
                                XL           YL


   Set Aut (YL′ → YL ) to be the group of pairs of automorphisms of YL′
and YL which intertwinewith the vertical morphism YL′ → YL . The map
σ 7→ f ′σ ◦ f ′−1 , f σ ◦ f −1 is 1-cocycle in H 1 (G, Aut (YL′ → YL )).
   Moreover if we denote Gf ′ := {σ ∈ G | f ′σ = f ′ } and M/F is the field
extension corresponding to the subgroup Gf ′ then Galois descent for affine
varieties provides the existence of the dotted morphism over M making the
following diagram commute
                                        ′
                                       fM
                                X′M           ′
                                             YM

                                       f′
                                X′L          YL′


In particular, if f ′ is an isomorphism then so is fM
                                                    ′ .


Galois Descent for The Map φ. We are going to apply these generalities to
the case X = B, Y = Mn , X′ = GL1 (E), Y ′ = A. The morphisms are
φ and φ↾GL1 (E)L , the restriction of φ to GL1 (E)L . The schematic image of
φ↾GL1 (E)L is exactly AL .
   The Skolem-Noether theorem implies that for each σ ∈ G there exists
nσ ∈ GLn (L) such that φσ = Adnσ ◦φ where Adnσ is the conjugation by
nσ . The equivalence class of nσ in PGLn (L) is uniquely determined by this
equality. Denote this class by [nσ ].
34                                   I. KHAYUTIN

   Denote by NPGLn (PA) the normalizer group of the split torus PA in
PGLn . The following holds because the Galois action is well defined in the
arrow category                     σ
                        φ↾GL1 (E)L       = Adnσ ◦ φ↾GL1 (E)L .
A fortiori, Adnσ (PAL ) = PAL , thus [nσ ] ∈ NPGLn (PA)(L).
  We can now define a natural homomorphism of finite groups η : G →
W(L), where W is the Weyl group of PA. This homomorphism is defined
by the composition of the following maps
             σ7→[nσ ]
(14)      G −−−−→ NPGLn (PA)(L) → NPGLn (PA)PA(L) = W(L)
Because PA is split over L the group W(L) is equal to the absolute Weyl
group of PA.
   Note that a priori, the map G → W(L) is only a 1-cocycle, but as the
torus PA is already split over F the action of G on W(L) is trivial, hence η
is a homomorphism.
   Moreover, we have a natural isomorphism between the Weyl group of PA
in PGLn and the Weyl group of TL in GL , we identify them both by abuse
of notation.
Proposition 6.5. The homomorphism of finite groups η : G → W(L) de-
fined in (14) is injective.
Proof. By abuse of notation we identify elements of the Weyl group and the
corresponding automorphisms of the torus. The discussion above implies
that for all σ ∈ G we have φ↾σGL1 (E)L = η(σ) ◦ φ↾GL1 (E)L . Therefore, the
Galois group stabilizer of φ↾PGL1 (E)L is Gφ↾PGL (E) = ker η. Galois descent
                                                 1  L
implies that the torus GL1 (E) is split already over the subfield which corre-
sponds to ker η. Yet L is the minimal splitting field of GL1 (E), hence ker η
is trivial.                                                                 
6.2.1. Galois Action on Canonical Generators. We see that the Galois ac-
tion on φ factors through the Weyl group. This allows us to compute the
way in which the canonical generators of a rational point transform under
the Galois group. By abuse of notation we denote both the L-points in the
Weyl group of PA and the L-points in the Weyl group of T by W , those
abstract groups are isomorphic through φ. In addition, because of the pre-
vious proposition we can treat G as a subgroup of W . Henceforth we avoid
writing explicitly the homomorphism η.
   We turn to describe the action of the Galois group on the canonical gen-
erators at a rational point.
Proposition 6.6. Let g ∈ G(F) and τ ∈ G, then for every σ ∈ W
                              τ.Ψσ (g) = Ψτ στ −1 (g)
Proof. Let nτ ∈ NPGLn (PA)(L) be a representative of τ ∈ W such that
φτ = Adnτ ◦φ.
                          DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                                        35

  Recall that Ψ0σ is defined over F and that g is an F-point, hence
                             
     τ.Ψσ (g) = τ. Ψ0σ (φ(g)) = Ψ0σ (τ.(φ(g))) = Ψ0σ (φτ (g))
               = Ψ0σ (nτ φ(g)n−1           −1      −1   −1
                               τ ) = Ψσ (φ (nτ )gφ (nτ ) )
                          n
                                                      !
                        X
               = Nrd        (σ.ei )φ (nτ )gφ (nτ ) ei Nrd(g)−1
                                    −1      −1    −1

                        i=1
                        n
                                                              !
                        X                   
                                    −1              −1
               = Nrd          (στ        ).ei g(τ        .ei ) Nrd(g)−1
                        i=1
                         n
                                                          !
                        X                       
               = Nrd          (τ στ −1 ).ei · g · ei          Nrd(g)−1 = Ψτ στ −1 (g)
                        i=1
                                                                                        
  Unlike the case of PGL2 the canonical generators of rational points are
not necessarily rational, except for3 Ψid . Nevertheless, we understand rather
well their Galois orbits. Specifically, when G ∼  = Sn each Ψσ (g) belongs to the
subfield of L which corresponds to the centralizer subgroup ZSn (σ) and the
Galois orbits of the canonical generators correspond to conjugacy classes in
Sn . Thus the number of those orbits  q is the partition number p(n) which for
large n is approximately 4n1√3 exp π 2n 3 . Of course, we have in addition
numerous algebraic relations between the generators. We now combine those
algebraic relations with Proposition 6.6. This a place where 2-transitivity
of the Galois group is heavily used.
Corollary 6.7. Assume that G is 2-transitive. Let g ∈ G(F) and let σ ∈ W
be an element of the Weyl group without fixed points. If Ψσ (g) = 0 then for
every τ 6= id we have Ψτ (g) = 0 and Ψid (g) = 1. Therefore the image of g
in T\\G//T is TeT.
                                            
Proof. For every τ 6= id we look at Cτ = υτ υ −1 | υ ∈ G ⊂ W ∼    = Sn . The
set Cτ has a complete set of roots in the sense of Proposition 4.6, hence by
the same proposition there exists υ ∈ G such that Ψυτ υ−1 (g) = 0. But Ψτ (g)
is Galois conjugate to Ψυτ υ−1 (g) so Ψτ (g) = 0 as well.
   To calculate Ψid (g) we use the relation between the canonical generators
coming from the Leibniz formula
                                X
                                     Ψτ (g) = 1
                                 τ ∈W

Because Ψτ (g) = 0 for τ 6= id we have Ψid (g) = 1.
   By now we have proved the Ψτ (g) = Ψτ (e) for all τ ∈ W . Because the
Ψτ ’s generate the whole ring of regular functions on T\\G//T L the image
                                 
of g as an L-point in T\\G//T L is equal to the image of e. Yet because

  3This has been confirmed using the SageMath mathematical software [S+ 15].
36                              I. KHAYUTIN

the F-points of a variety naturally inject into the L-points, we conclude that
the image of g in T\\G//T is already equal to the image of the identity. 

     7. Local Integral Structure of Double Torus Quotient
   Our goal is to study the integral properties of the canonical generators
evaluated at a point associated to two torus orbits coming from the same
packet.
   The type of results we are about to prove are the simplest to state when
F = Q. Then if δL T(A)gA , δR T(A)gA with δR , δL ∈ G(Q) are two represen-
tatives of the same homogeneous toral set then Df Ψσ (gL −1 gR ) is integral,
where Df is the product of the local archimedean discriminants of the ho-
mogeneous toral set. For a general number field F we need to replace Df by
a suitable ideal of OF .
   These results are crucial, for they allow us to apply rudimentary geometry
of numbers later on. This is akin to the simple fact that, in rank 1, the
discriminant inner product of two binary integral quadratic forms associated
with two periodic torus orbits is integral.
7.1. The integral structure. Let G be as in the previous section, viz. G
is isogenous to PGL1 (B) for a degree n central simple algebra B over F. We
fix once and for all an OF -order Ω ⊂ B(F). Let Ωu ⊂ B(Fu ) be the u-adic
closure of Ω, then Ωu is a maximal order for almost all places u. Define also
the compact-open subgroups Ku < G(Fu ) using the order Ω
                           Ku := Z(Fu )PGL1 (Ωu )
where Z is the finite center of G.
7.2. Homogeneous Toral Sets for Central Simple Algebras. Let T <
G be a maximal torus define and anisotropic over F and gA ∈ G(A). This
data fixes a homogeneous toral set
                             Y = G(F)T(A)gA
Recall that the isogeny
                          SL1 (B) → G → PGL1 (B)
restricts to an isogeny of maximal tori
                          SL1 (E) → T → PGL1 (E)
where the closed subvariety E < B represents an embedding ι : K ֒→ B(F)
of a degree n field extension K/F.
   A homogeneous toral set G(F)T(A)gA , gA = (gu )u∈VF , defines for all
u ∈ VF a torus over Fu
                              Hu := gu −1 TFu gu
The homogeneous toral set is invariant under the geometric torus Hu (Fu ) at
each rational place u. Denote by ΨT                              G
                                   σ the canonical generators T\\ //T over
a splitting field and by Ψσ the canonical generators for Hu\\GFu//Hu over
                          H u
                         DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                              37

a splitting field. The equality ΨT         Hu   −1
                                  σ (λ) = Ψσ (gu λgu ) holds in any field
extension of Fu splitting the torus T.
  Throughout this section the homogeneous toral set Y is fixed.

7.3. The associated order. Define
                               Cu = gu−1 EFu gu
where EFu is the base change of E to Fu /F. In particular, Cu is defined over
Fu and the isogeny (11) induces an isogeny of tori
                       SL1 (Cu ) → Hu → PGL1 (Cu )
The commutative algebra Cu (Fu ) is a degree n étale-algebra over Fu satis-
fying
                                              Y
                   Cu (Fu ) ≃ Ku = K ⊗ Fu ≃        Kv
                                                  v|u

We now define a local order Ru < Cu (Fu ) by
                             Ru = Cu (Fu ) ∩ Ωu
Notice that gu maps to PGL1 (Ωu ) at almost all places u, hence Ru , as an
order in Ku , coincides with the completion of Ω ∩ E(F) at almost all places.
The latter is an order in E(F) ≃ K, hence Ru coincides with the unique
maximal order in Ku for almost all u. We can then take the intersection
                               R := ∩u<∞ Ru
inside K. This intersection is again an order in K that differs from the naive
version Ω ∩ E(F) at the places where gA is not integral. We will be chiefly
interested in homogeneous toral set such that the attached order R is the
unique maximal order in K. We turn to discuss the relation between the
discriminant of R and the discriminant of the homogeneous toral set.

7.4. Discriminant Data. For the cases we study we can provide a more
concrete description of the discriminant data. It will be useful in studying
the arithmetic properties of the canonical generators.

7.4.1. Local Nonarchimedean Discriminant.
Definition 7.1. The relative local discriminant of Ru is
                         Du := det(Trd(fi fj ))1≤i,j≤n
where f1 , . . . , fn is an OFu basis for Ru . We could have chosen a different
base for Ru and get a different value for the relative local discriminant, but
all those values would differ only by a square of a unit [Cas86, §7.6]. Hence
the relative local discriminant is a well defined class in OFu × 2 . We fix
                                                                 OFu
some representative for Du .
38                                  I. KHAYUTIN

   The local discriminant Du of Y whose definition appears in §2.3.2 is almost
equal to the absolute discriminant of Ru , |Du |−1u [ELMV11, Lemma 9.5].
The two notions differ by a constant factor which for almost all places u is
equal to 1. We take the liberty to ignore this non-consequential subtlety and
redefine the local discriminant of a homogeneous toral set to be equal hereon
to the absolute discriminant of Ru , i.e. Du := |Du |−1
                                                     u .

7.4.2. Local Archimedean Discriminant. Recall that in order to calculate the
local
 Vr discriminant   at an archimedean place u we had a choice of a norm on
           ⊗2
( g(Fu )) with r = n − 1. We restrict ourselves to a norm of a specific
type which will be comfortable later on.
   Set Fu to be the algebraic closure of Fu , as Fu ∼
                                                    = C we identify them both
                                Vr       ⊗2
and work over C. A norm on         g(Fu )      naturally restricts to a norm on
 Vr        ⊗2
( g(Fu )) .
   We have a decomposition of C-vector spaces
                              B(C) = B0 (C) ⊕ Id C
Where B0 := ker Trd is the trace zero part of the algebra.
   Let Q be a Hermitian inner product on B(C) such that the spaces B0 (C)
and Id C are orthogonal to each other.
   This in turn induces an inner product on g(C) using the identification of
g(C) with the trace zero part B0 (C).                                 V
   This inner product can be extended to an inner product on r g(C) using
the standard
          Vr determinant construction. This last inner product     Vr is a⊗2bilinear
form on      g(C) so it extends to a linear functional on ( g(C)) . The
absolute value of this linear functional will be the required norm.
   As before, t is the Lie algebra of T. If we choose a base f1 , . . . , fr for
Ad(gu−1 )t(Fu ) we can extend it to a base f0 = 1, f1 , . . . , fn−1=r of Cu (Fu ) by
identifying Ad(gu−1 )t(Fu ) with the trace zero part of Cu (Fu ). For this base
we can calculate the discriminant in the following way
(15)         Du = det(Q(fi , fj ))1≤i,j≤r · |det(Trd(fi fj ))1≤i,j≤r |−1
(16)             = det(Q(fi , fj ))0≤i,j≤r · |det(Trd(fi fj ))0≤i,j≤r |−1
Expression (15) involves determinants of f1 , . . . , fr and expression (16) in-
volves determinant of f0 , f1 , . . . , fr . The second expression is independent
of the base we have chosen for Cu (C). Hence for Q of the form we are dis-
cussing, we can use (16) as the definition of the archimedean discriminant
with any base we like for Cu (C).
7.4.3. Global Discriminant.
Matrix algebra over Q. We start with describing the global discriminant in
the classical setting of Mn over F = Q.
   The following description of the global discriminant from [ELMV09, ELMV11]
is important for applications.
       b ∈ S be a fixed place. Fix as well a split torus H0 over Qub .
   Let u
                            DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                                     39

   We consider only homogeneous toral sets for which Hub = H0 and Hu =
Tu for all u 6= u
                b. Notably, T is assumed to be split over Qub. We call such
homogeneous toral sets simple.
   Given T there are no more than finitely many simple homogeneous toral
sets corresponding to T. They are parametrized by the absolute Weyl group
of T.
   Notice that the general definition of the local discriminant depends only
on the tori Hu . In our concrete case all these tori either come from T or are
all equal to H0 at the place ub. Hence the local discriminant at the place u  b
does not depend on the simple homogeneous toral set. Its contribution to
the global discriminant is immaterial.
   On the other hand at all places u 6= ub the local discriminant is a property
of T. Accordingly, the global discriminant of such a homogeneous toral set
essentially depends only on T.
   As expected, the global discriminant in this case is actually an invariant
of a global object. To such a homogeneous toral set one can attach a global
order R := K ∩ Ω, where K = E(Q) and E is the maximal commutative
subalgebra over T. Recall that K is a degree n field extension of Q and R
is an order in this number field.
   It is shown in [ELMV11, §6.3] that the discriminant of the order R co-
incides up to a constant factor with the global discriminant of the homoge-
neous toral set. This equality of discriminants follows from the fact that the
discriminant of an order can be calculated locally as well4.
Relative non-archimedean discriminant. We return to our general setting of
a central simple algebra B over a number field F with Y a general homoge-
neous toral set.
   We begin with the definition of the absolute non-archimedean discrimi-
nant.
Definition 7.2. We define the absoluteQ non-archimedean discriminant of
the homogeneous toral set to be Df = u∈Vf Du where the product is taken
across all the non-archimedean places.
  There is a notion of a relative global non-archimedean discriminant which
will be useful to us. This notion refines the global discriminant of simple
homogeneous toral sets for Mn over Q.
Definition 7.3. The relative non-archimedean discriminant of the homoge-
neous toral set is the unique ideal D of OF such that for any u ∈ VF,f the
closure of D in OFu is Du OFu .
  One can see using the relation between the norm of an ideal and non-
archimedean valuations that
                            Y             Y
                NrF/Q D =       |Du |−1
                                     u  =     Du = Df
                                u∈VF,f             u∈VF,f

  4The place u
             b splits in K so the local discriminant of the order R at u
                                                                       b is trivial.
40                               I. KHAYUTIN

In particular, if F=Q then D = Df Z.


7.5. Denominators of Canonical Generators. Recall the we have fixed
a homogeneous toral set Y := G(F)T(A)gA .
   Let δL T(A)gA , δR T(A)gA with δL , δR ∈ G(F) be two representatives of
the homogeneous toral set Y . We are interested in what can be said about

                                 λ := δL −1 δR

when δR T(A)gA belongs to a small neighborhood around δL T(A)gA . Specif-
ically, given a finite place u, we look at pairs (δL , δR ) ∈ G(F)×2 such that

                         δR T(Fu )gu ⊂ δL T(Fu )gu Ku

Or equivalently
                                    Y
           λ = δL −1 δR ∈ G(F) ∩            T(Fu )gu Ku gu −1 T(Fu )
                                   u∈VF,f
                                    Y
                        = G(F) ∩            gu Hu (Fu )Ku Hu (Fu )gu −1
                                   u∈VF,f


   We would like to compute a denominator for ΨT      σ (λ) ∈ L in each field
extension Lw , when w is a non-archimedean place of L. By a denominator
we mean a w-adic integer dw ∈ OLw such that dw ΨT    σ (λ) ∈ OLw . Examining
the rank 1 case one observes that a natural candidate for this denominator
is the local discriminant of the torus. Actually, it will be the local relative
discriminant.
   Recall that as λ is an F-point and the polynomials ΨT     σ for σ ∈ W are
defined over L we have that ΨT σ (λ) ∈ L. For a place  w  of L extending u we
fix a commutative diagram of embeddings

                                      L


                            F                      Lw


                                     Fu


This induces the following commutative diagram of natural injections for
points in G
                         DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                             41


                                   G(L)


                     G(F)                        G(Lw )


                                   G(Fu )


We can write in G(Fu ): gu −1 λgu = hLu ku hR                   L R
                                            u with ku ∈ Ku and hu , hu ∈
Hu (Fu ). These elementary facts imply that in Lw one has
                          −1        Hu L      R
           ΨT        Hu                              Hu
            σ (λ) = Ψσ (gu λgu ) = Ψσ (hu ku hu ) = Ψσ (ku )
The last equality holds because ΨH σ
                                     u
                                       is invariant under the left and right
actions of Hu . Hence for u non-archimedean it is enough to consider expres-
sions of the form ΨH
                   σ (ku ).
                     u


Proposition 7.4. Let u be a non-archimedean place of F and let w be a
place of L above u. Assume that B is unramified over u, equivalently G is
u-split. Assume that Ru is the maximal order of Cu := Cu (Fu ). Then for
all σ ∈ W and for all ku ∈ Ku we have
                             Du ΨH
                                 σ (ku ) ∈ OLw
                                  u


Proof. First notice that it is enough to prove the claim for G = PGL1 (B)
and Ku = PGL1 (Ωu ). The general case would follow from the fact that the
isogeny sends Ku to a subset of PGL1 (Ωu ).
Sketch. We begin by providing a sketch of the proof for PGL1 (B). The
idea is simple but the proof is cluttered with technical details.
    (1) Without loss of generality we can assume that Ωu is a maximal order.
    (2) Over a non-archimedean place u of F where B is unramified the
         central simple algebra B(Fu ) is isomorphic to a matrix algebra over
         Fu .
    (3) The isomorphism from item 2 can be chosen so that the image of Ωu
         is exactly the matrix ring over OFu .
    (4) The basic idea is to find a nice element g ∈ GLn (Lw ) conjugating
         the standard diagonal commutative subalgebra of the matrix algebra
         to Cw := Cu (Lw ) and then transform ΨH   σ (ku ) to an expression in-
                                                     u

        volving primitive orthogonal idempotents over the standard diagonal
         torus, e01 , . . . , e0n .
    (5) The expression for the canonical generator becomes
                                    n
                                                     !
                                    X             0
               Hu
              Ψσ (ku ) = Nrd          σ.ei g ku g ei · Nrd(ku −1 )
                                         0  −1

                             i=1
             0         0
   (6) Both ei and σ.ei are in Ωw which is the matrix ring over OLw . The
       same holds for ku ∈ Ku ⊂ Ωu ⊂ Ωw .
42                                      I. KHAYUTIN

      (7) The heart of the argument: We are able to choose g so that both g −1
          and ∆g are in the order Ωw , where ∆−1 ∈ Cu generates the different
          ideal of Ru which is principal. The norm of ∆ contributes the Du
          factor to the end result.
     The choice of a nice g as above is done in the following way
      (1) In matrix algebras the embedding of rational tori with a given Ru
          are in bijection with homothety classes of bases for proper fractional
          ideals of Ru .
      (2) Since Ru is maximal it is a PID, and all the embeddings correspond
          to bases of the trivial fractional ideal. This translates directly to the
          fact that we can choose g as above such that the rows of g−1 are a
          base for Ru . In particular, g−1 is integral.
      (3) The rows of tg , equivalently the columns of g, will be a dual base
          with respect to the reduced trace to the rows of g −1 ; hence they span
          the inverse different. To transform the matrix g into an integral one,
          we need to multiply it by the generator of the different ideal.
Structure of the Algebra over Fu . The order Ωu is contained in a maximal
order Ωmax
        u   ⊇ Ωu . One has that Ku is a subset of PGL1 (Ωmax   u ).
   The order Ru is contained in the order Ωmax  u   ∩ C u , where Cu = Cu (Fu ).
As Ru was assumed to be a maximal order this is actually an equality 5. We
see that the assumptions of the theorem would hold with Ωu replaced by
Ωmax
  u   and that its conclusion for Ωu follows from that for Ωmaxu . We assume
without loss of generality that Ωu = Ωmax u  .
   As Bu is unramified it is isomorphic to the matrix algebra Mn (Fu ). More-
over, by [AG60, Theorem 3.5 and Theorem 3.8] we can choose the isomor-
               ∼
phism ι : Bu − → Mn (Fu ) so that ι(Ωu ) = Mn (OFu ) (see also [Rei75, Theo-
rem 17.3]). By abuse of notation we will identify Bu with Mn (Fu ) and Ωu
with its image.
   Let Bw := Bu ⊗Fu Lw ∼     = Mn (Lw ) and let Ωw := Mn (OLw ). The ring Ωw
is a maximal order in Bw and Ωw ∩ Bu = Ωu .
   Let Diagw be the diagonal commutative algebra in Mn (Lw ) and set
Aw := PGL1 (Diag w ). Write Tw := T(Lw ). The tori Tw and Aw are
both split, hence there exists g0 ∈ G(Lw ) such that Tw = g0 Aw g0 −1 . It
follows that Cw = g0 Diagw g0 −1 , where Cw := C(Lw ). Any element of
g0 NGLn (Lw ) (Diag w ) will also conjugate those two commutative algebras to
each other. Our aim now is to find a conjugating element whose matrix rows
are a base for a proper fractional ideal I of Ru in a suitable sense.
Fractional Ideals. The explicit definition of a proper fractional ideal of Ru is
as follows. A full OFu -lattice J ⊆ Cu is an Ru fractional ideal if Ru J ⊆ J .
The ring associated to a J is
(17)                           OJ := {x ∈ Cu | xJ ⊆ J }
     5This is not the significant use of the maximality of R .
                                                            u
                              DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                                      43

The fractional ideal is proper for Ru if OJ = Ru .     Q
   The étale-algebra Cu is a product of fields6 Cu ∼
                                                    = v∈Wu Kv . The fields
                                                 P
Kv for7 v ∈ Wu are finite extensions of Fu and v∈Wu [Kv : FP   u ] = n.
   Let 1v ∈ Cu be the identity element of Kv . Obviously
                                                    Q      e =    v∈Wu 1v . By
                                                  ∼
the maximality assumption for Ru we have Ru = v∈Wu OKv . We can use
this decomposition of Ru to decompose any Ru fractional ideal J into a
sum of OKv fractional ideals J ∼= ⊕v∈Wu Jv , where Jv := 1v J . It holds that
J is Ru -proper if and only if Jv is OKv proper for all v ∈ Wu .
   If J is proper then each Jv is a proper fractional ideal of the Discrete
Valuation Ring8 OKv , hence it is principal and invertible. We conclude that
J itself is principal and invertible. One can choose aJ ∈ Cu× such that
J = aJ Ru .
   For each fractional ideal J one can define the dual fractional ideal
(18)                   Jq = {x ∈ Cu | Trd(xJ ) ⊆ OFu }
                                                                       |u is
The dual is proper if J is. In particular, the local inverse different R
proper and principal9. We write R|u = ∆−1 Ru for ∆ ∈ R× . Essentially by
                                                          u
definition, ∆ can be chosen so that Nrd(∆) = Du .
Associated Fractional Ideal. We follow the proof of [ELMV09, Corollary 4.4]
to show that a conjugating element can be chosen so its rows are in a suitable
manner a base for a proper fractional ideal.
   We start by constructing an Fu -vector space isomorphism  : Cu → Fnu .
For each v ∈ Wu we have a linear endomorphism of Fnu given by a 7→ 1v · a,
where the right hand side is the multiplication of a matrix by a vector.
Because 1v 6= 0 for each v, the kernel of this endomorphism is a proper
linear subspace of Fnu . The union of a finite collection of proper subspaces
never exhausts a vector space over characteristic 0, hence there exists a ∈ Fnu
such that 1v ·a 6= 0 for all v ∈ Wu . Let (x) := x·a. Notice that  intertwines
the action of Cu on itself by matrix-matrix multiplication with the action of
Cu on Fnu by matrix-vector multiplication.
   To see that  is an isomorphism
                            P         we prove it has a trivial kernel. For each
0 6= x ∈ Cu one has x = v∈Wu x1v and x1v can be identified with the Kv
component of x. In particular, there exists v0 , depending on x, such that
x1v0 6= 0. Let yv0 ∈ Cu be the inverse of x1v0 in Kv0 , then yv0 x = 1v0 . If
0 6= x ∈ ker  then x · a = 0 and 0 = yv0 x · a = 1v0 · a which is a contradiction.
   The fractional ideal we seek is the OFu -lattice I := −1 (OFnu ). Denote the
canonical base elements for Fnu by bi = (0, . . . , 0, 1, 0, . . . , 0) with 1 in the i
   6When H is an extension of scalars of an anisotropic F torus then K := C(F) is a field.
          u
                                                     Q
Weak approximation for number fields implies Cu ∼  = v|u Kv where v runs over the places
of K over u.
   7We can consider W as a set of equivalence classes of valuation on finite field extensions
                       u
of Fu .
   8This is one of the significant uses of the maximality assumption.
   9Second significant use of the maximality assumption.
44                                      I. KHAYUTIN

place for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Let βi := −1 (bi ); this is a base of I. Notice that for
any x = (xi,j )1≤i,j≤n ∈ Cu ⊂ Mn (Fu ) we have
                                          n
                                          X                        n
                                                                   X
                   xβj = −1 (xbj ) =           xi,j −1 (bi ) =          xi,j βi
                                          i=1                      i=1

This implies immediately that OI = Mn (OFu ) ∩ Cu = Ru , i.e. I is a proper
Ru fractional ideal.


The Conjugating Matrix. Fix e1 , . . . , en – an ordered complete set of primi-
tive orthogonal idempotents of Cw . We embed I back into Cw by defining
an Lw -algebra isomorphism ι : Cw → Lnw , given by

                     ι(x) := (Trd(xe1 ), Trd(xe2 ), . . . , Trd(xen ))

For every x = (xi,j )1≤i,j≤n ∈ Cw we can write
                                                      n
                                                      X
                          ι(x)ι(βj ) = ι(xβj ) =            xi,j ι(βi )
                                                      i=1

Let Mι(x) ∈ GLn (Lw ) be the diagonal matrix in the canonical basis cor-
responding to the linear transformation a 7→ ι(x)a. The equality above
implies for any x ∈ Cw that gI Mι(x) gI −1 = x, where gI ∈ GLn (Lw )
is the base change matrix defined by gI ι(βi ) = bi . We conclude that
gI Diagw gI −1 = Cw .
   The ideal I is principal and invertible because it is proper. Write I =
                      ×                                                     ∼
Q u for some a ∈ Cu . The elements aβ1 , . . . , aβn form a basis for Ru =
aR
   v∈Wu OKv , hence they are all integral. As ι is an algebra isomorphism, we
deduce that ri := ι(aβi ) is integral for all i, viz. ri ∈ OLnw .
   Define g = gI Mι(a−1 ) then gDiag w g−1 = Cw and g−1 bi = ι(αβi ) = ri ∈
OLw . We deduce that g −1 ∈ Ωw .
  n




Integrality of ∆g. We have shown that g −1 is integral, the last critical step
will be to show the ∆g is also in Mn (OLw ).
     Because of the way we constructed the isomorphism ι, the reduced trace
form on Cw is pushed forward by ι to the regular euclidean form on Lnw . In
particular tg is the adjoint of g with respect to this bilinear form. Hence if
rq1 , . . . , rqn is the dual base of r1 , . . . , rn , then tg bi = rqi .
     Notice that ι−1 (rq1 ), . . . , ι−1 (rqn ) is the dual base of aβ1 , . . . , aβn . Thus
it is an OFu base of R        |u = ∆−1 Ru . In particular, ι(∆)q           ri ∈ OLnw for all i.
                           t
We see that Mι(∆) g ∈ Mn (OLw ), so by applying the transpose we have
                                   
OLw ∋ gMι(∆) = g g−1 ∆g = ∆g.
                           DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                                                45

Concluding the Proof. Let e01 = g−1 e1 g, . . . , e0n = g−1 en g. This is a complete
set of primitive idempotents for Diagw . We can always choose a representa-
tive for ku in GL1 (Ωu ) which we now use. Next we compute
                          n
                                       !
                         X
      Ψσ (ku )Du = Nrd       σ.ei ku ei Nrd(ku −1 ) Nrd(∆)
                           i=1
                            n
                                                                   !
                           X                             
                 = Nrd           σ.e0i   g   −1
                                                  ku g       e0i       Nrd(ku −1 ) Nrd(g−1 ∆g)
                           i=1
                            n
                                                                       !
                           X                                 
                 = Nrd           σ.e0i   g   −1
                                                  ku ∆g          e0i       Nrd(ku −1 )
                           i=1

            line we have used the fact that g −1 ∆g ∈ Diagw .
In the last P
   Because ni=1 σ.e0i g −1 ku ∆g e0i is in the order Ωw it has integral reduced
norm. In addition, ku −1 ∈ GL1 (Ωu ) and it also has an integral reduced norm.
This concludes the proof.                                                     
   Unfortunately, the proof above works only if B is unramified over u. Al-
though it would be plausible that the conclusion of the proof holds under
weaker assumptions, as is the case in rank 1, we can only produce the fol-
lowing result. This result for the ramified places is significantly weaker but
it needs only to be applied for finitely many places of F.
Proposition 7.5. Let u be a non-archimedean place of F and let w be a
place of L above u. Assume that Ru is the maximal order. Then for all
σ ∈ W and for all ku ∈ Ku we have

                             Du 1+n/2 Ψσ (ku ) ∈ OLw
Proof. We carry notation from the proof of the previous theorem. Let
r1 , . . . , rn be an OFu -base for Ru , We shall call it the integral base. The
dual base with respect to the reduced trace, rq1 , . . . , rqn , is an OFu -base to
|u = ∆−1 Ru . In particular for all i we have ∆rqi ∈ Ru .
R
    Using lemma 6.4 we can write
                              Xn
               Ψσ (ku ) = Nrd(   σ.ri ku rqi ) Nrd(ku −1 )
                                  i=1
                             Xn
                       = Nrd(   σ.ri ku (∆rqi )) Nrd(ku −1 )Du −1
                                  i=1


                                   P
We would like to transform ni=1 σ.ri ku (∆rqi ) to an element of Ωw . Both
ku and ∆rqi for all i are in Ωu , but σ.ri is not necessarily so.
   For each 1 ≤ j ≤ n we would like to write down in Cw the element σ.rj
in the integral base r1 , . . . , rn . To do this we need to find out the matrix
46                                  I. KHAYUTIN

corresponding to the linear transformation defined by the Weyl element σ
in the r1 , . . . , rn base.
    In Cw we have another natural base. This is the base of the orthogonal
primitive idempotents e1 , . . . , en . We shall call this the orthogonal base. Let
M be the matrix in the orthogonal base of the transformation sending ei to
ri . Because all the ri are integral we  √ have M ∈ Mn (OLw ). By definition of
the discriminant, we have det M = Du .
    The matrix corresponding to σ in the orthogonal base is just the standard
permutation matrix Pσ . Hence the matrix corresponding to σ in the integral
base is Qσ := M Pσ M −1 = M Pσ M adj · (det M )−1 . Where M adj ∈ Mn (OLw )
is the adjugate√      matrix of M , which is constructed from the minors of M .
    We see that Du Qσ = M Pσ M adj is an integral matrix. This implies that
for all j we have
                  p
                     Du σ.rj ∈ SpanOLw (r1 , . . . , rn ) = Ωw ∩ Cw ⊂ Ωw
                                    P √
    We have thus proved that ni=1 Du σ.ri ku (∆rqi ) ∈ Ωw . √          This concludes
                                                                                √
the proof if we notice that the determinant of the matrix diag( Du , . . . , Du )
is exactly Du n/2 .                                                                

7.5.1. Archimedean Denominators. We will also need an archimedean ana-
logue of Proposition 7.4. The proof boils down to the following trivial linear
algebra lemma.
Lemma 7.6. Let V be an n-dimensional vector space over C endowed with
an inner product Q : V × V → C.
   Let ǫ1 , . . . , ǫn be a base of V . We form the Gram matrix of ǫ1 , . . . , ǫn ∈ V
with respect to the inner product Q
                             Gr := (Q (ǫi , ǫj ))1≤,i,j≤n
     Then there exists U ∈ Un (C) and a real diagonal matrix S such that
(19)                              Gr = U S 2 U −1
                          2
Evidently, det Gr = (det
                       S)−1.
  Moreover, the base U S ǫi 1≤i≤n is an orthonormal base with respect to
Q.
Proof. The matrix Gr is Hermitian, hence there exists a unitary diagonal-
ization Gr = U DU −1 . The existence of a square root of D follows from the
positive-definiteness of Q.                                              
Proposition 7.7. Let u be an archimedean place of F and let w be a place
of L above u. Denote by | · |w the canonical absolute value on L associated
to w.
   Let Bu ⊂ G(Fu ) be a pre-compact set. Then for any g ∈ Bu and for all
σ∈W
                            |ΨHσ (g)|w ≪Bu Du
                                u
                            DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                              47

Proof. We have that either Lw ∼       = Fu or Lw ∼    = Fu , where Fu ∼= C is the
algebraic closure of Fu . In any case we can identify Lw ∼      = Fu ∼
                                                                     = C where all
the the absolute values are compatible. Notice that the embedding of Bu in
G(C) is pre-compact as well. We work over C.
   In order to define the archimedean discriminant we had to fix an inner
product Qu on B(Fu ). We assume that this inner product is the restriction
of an Hermitian inner product Q on B(C) chosen as in 7.4.2.
   Let C := Cu (C) be the maximal commutative subalgebra corresponding
to Hu and let e1 , . . . , en a complete set of primitive orthogonal idempotents
in C.
   For any g ∈ G(C) we can write
                                           n
                                                              !
                                          X
                           Hu
                        Ψσ (g) = Nrd          eσ(i) · Ad(g)ei
                                           i=1
                                                          2          2
  We define a utility function ψ : G(C) × B(C)n × B(C)n → C
                                                                   
                                                n
                                                X
            ψ(g, bLi,j , bR
                          i,j )1≤i,j≤n := Nrd
                                                 bLi,j · Ad(g)bR
                                                                i,j
                                                                    
                                                  i,j=1

   This is a a continuous function so it is bounded on pre-compact sets. Let
KC ⊂ B(C) be the norm 1 ball with respect to10 Q. Our goal is to show
Du −1 ΨH                     n2 × (K )n2 ) which will prove the claim.
       σ (g) ∈ ψ(Bu × (KC )
          u
                                      C
   To calculate Du we can use any base f1 , . . . , fn of C and apply equation
(16)
                                                                         −1
            Du = det (Q(fi , fj ))1≤i,j≤n · det (Trd(fi fj ))1≤i,j≤n
                                                                         w
   We can compute the discriminant using the complete set of primitive
orthogonal idempotents e1 , . . . , en .
                            Du = det (Q(ei , ej ))1≤i,j≤n
This is just the determinant of the Gram matrix Gr of e1 , . . . , en .
   By Lemma 7.6 we can write Gr = U S 2 U −1 with U Hermitian and S
diagonal with (det S)2 = Du . In addition, the Q-orthonormal vectors fi :=
U S −1 ei , 1 ≤ i ≤ n, all belong to KC .           P
   Write S −1 = diag(s1 , . . . , sn ) and let ς := ni=1 si ei ∈ Cu . We have
                                             n
                                                               !
                                            X
            −1 Hu
       Du Ψσ (g) = Nrd(σ.ς) Nrd                 eσ(i) · Ad(g)ei Nrd(Ad(g)ς)
                                            i=1
                                n
                                                                 !
                                X
                      = Nrd           sσ(i) eσ(i) · Ad(g)si ei
                                i=1
                                                                                
  10This is a decent analogue for some purposes of the compact subgroup of the non-
archimedean case, hence the notation.
48                                 I. KHAYUTIN

   Notice that si ei = U −1 fi , hence each of the vectors si ei can be expressed
as a linear combination of f1 , . . . , fn with coefficients equal to the entries of
U −1 . As U −1 is unitarian, all its coefficients are smaller then 1 in absolute
value. This concludes the proof.

              8. Lower Bound for Asymptotic Entropy
  We continue with the notations of the previous sections. We now intro-
duce the S-arithmetic setting which is well suited for entropy arguments.
Fix a finite set of places of F, denoted by S, such that the following holds
   (1) All the archimedean places are included in S.
   (2) There is a place in S over which B is isotropic. This condition implies
        that G(FS ) is not compact.
   (3) The set S is large enough so that
                                                Y
                        G(A) = G(F) · G(FS ) ·      Ku
                                                   u6∈S

        That is the algebraic group G has class number 1 with respect to S
        and the integral structure induced by Ω.
           Let F∞ to be the product of the completions of F at all archimedean
        places. Recall [Bor63, Theorem 5.1] that G(F)\G(A)/G(F ) Q          K
                                                                       ∞     u<∞       u
         is finite. Let δ1 , . . . , δk ∈ G(A) be a list of representatives for the
         double cosets. If for all 1 ≤ i ≤ k the set S contains all the places
         u such that δi 6∈ Ku , then the class number 1 assumption is trivially
         satisfied for S. In particular, S can always be enlarged to satisfy the
         class number 1 assumption.
One can deduce results analogous to ours for smaller sets S not fulfilling
the class number 1 assumption by taking quotients. Otherwise one can
deduce all our results directly avoiding this assumption with the downside
of obfuscatingQmany statements.
   Let K S = u6∈S Ku and define Γ = K S ∩ G(F) where the intersection is
taken with respect to the diagonal embedding
                                           Q          of G(F). Then Γ is a lattice
in the S-arithmetic product GS := u∈S G(Fu ), again with respect to the
diagonal embedding.
   Using the fact that G has class number one with respect to S, we can
identify
                                         ∼
                                 G(A)/ S −  GS
(20)                        G(F)\     K → Γ\
8.1. Limit Entropy of Well Separated Orbits. We begin by defining
the Bowen ball.
Definition 8.1. Let a ∈ GS be a semisimple element. Let B ⊂ GS be an
identity neighborhood. For any s < t ∈ Z Define
                           B (s,t) := a−s Bas ∩ a−t Bat
                          DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                              49

          Q                                                         (s,t)
  If B = u∈S Bu is a box then the u ∈ S component of B (s,t) is Bu :=
a−s     s   −t     t
 u Bu au ∩ au Bu au .
  We call B (s,t) a Bowen ball and for x ∈ Γ\GS we call x B (s,t) a Bowen
Ball around x.
   For a semisimple element a ∈ GS and B ⊂ GS chosen small enough we can
use the Lie algebra of GS to conceptually understand the behavior of the set
B (−t,t) for large t > 0. The Lie algebra of GS decomposes into eigenspaces
of Ad(a). All the eigenspaces on which Ad(a) acts with an eigenvalue which
is not of absolute value 1 will be either contracted or expanded under the
adjoint action of a. In particular, the preimage of B (−t,t) in the Lie algebra
will contract in all these eigenspaces. Hence for large t the set B (−t,t) will
be a thin tube.
   The reason we care about Bowen balls is that an exponentially decaying
bound on the average measure of Bowen balls implies an entropy bound for
a probability limit measure. The following proposition is an S-arithmetic
analogue of [ELMV09, Proposition 3.2]. Its proof is the same as of the
original proposition.
Proposition 8.2. Fix a semisimple element a ∈ GS . Suppose that {µi }∞  i=1
is a sequence of a-invariant probability measures on Γ\GS converging to a
probability measure µ in the weak-∗ topology.
   Assume that for some fixed η > 0 we have a sequence of integers τi →i→∞
∞ such that for any compact subset F ⊂ Γ\GS there exists an identity
neighborhood B ⊂ GS such that
                  n                                   o
           µi × µi (x, y) ∈ F × F | y ∈ xB (−τi ,τi )
                    Z                      
                  =     µi xB (−τi ,τi ) ∩ F dµi (x) ≪F exp(−2ητi )
                      F
Then the metric entropy of the a-action with respect to the measure µ satisfies
hµ (a) ≥ η.
8.2. Double Torus Quotient of a Bowen Ball. In this section we study
canonical generators of points in a Bowen ball. We will show that the
canonical generators are bounded in terms of the size of the Bowen ball.
    Fix a place u   b ∈ S and denote Fb := Fub. Let H < Gb be a maximal torus
                                                             F
defined over F.    b Let L/b Fb be the splitting field of H and denote by w b the
unique place of b     L with canonical absolute value | · |wb . For f ∈ b
                                                                        F we have
|f |wb = |f |udb for some fixed d ∈ N. Evidently, B is split over L. b
    We fix a ∈ H(F),   b all the Bowen balls we discuss are with respect to this
fixed a.                                                         
    Denote by ΨH     σ the canonical generators of H\\ F
                                                         Gb//H b . Notice that H
                                                                   L
is split over b   L so the generators are defined over b L. Our task is to bound
                        (s,t)
ΨHσ (g) when g ∈ Bu     b .
50                               I. KHAYUTIN

   There exists a maximal commutative subalgebra C < B such that H
is isogenous to PGL1 (C) under the fixed isogeny G → PGL1 (B). Let
eH            H
 1 , . . . , en be a complete set of primitive orthogonal idempotents for the
split commutative algebra C(L).   b As usual we identify the absolute Weyl
group of H with the symmetric group on eH                  H
                                              1 , . . . , en .

Definition 8.3 (Coordinates relative to H). As the algebra B is split over
L there exists an isomorphism over b
b                                  L
(21)                            ξ : BLb → Mn,Lb

such that ξ(CLb ) = DiagbL . Choose ξ so it is compatible with the fixed
                                                          L) and DiagbL ( b
orderings of the primitive orthogonal idempotents in CLb ( b             L).
  Recall that xi,j are the usual coordinate functions on the matrix algebra.
We define
                                xH
                                 i,j = xi,j ◦ ξ

The functions xH                                    b b ]. In particular, they
               i,j are regular functions generating L[BL
are continuous with respect to the Hausdorff topology on BLb ( bL).
Lemma 8.4. Let σ be an element of the absolute Weyl group of H. When
considered as a function of GFb , the canonical generator ΨH
                                                           σ can be written
as
                                             n
                                             Y
                                          −1
                         H
                       Ψσ = sign σ (det)        xH
                                                 σ(i),i
                                               i=1

Proof. Notice that this is well defined once an isogeny G → PGL1 (B) is
fixed. The claim follows directly from Propositions 4.1 and 6.3.     

   We need to explicate the relation between roots of H and the set of roots
Rσ associated to σ ∈ WH . The group WH is the absolute Weyl group of H
which is identified with the symmetric group over the primitive orthogonal
idempotents. Recall the definition of the set of roots of σ ∈ WH ∼
                                                                 = Sn
                    Rσ := {(σ(i), i) | 1 ≤ i ≤ n, σ(i) 6= i}
  The roots of H are the non-trivial weights of the adjoint action of H on the
Lie algebra Lie(G). Because H splits over b  L the roots can be defined over b
                                                                             L.
The roots αi,j : HLb → Gm are indexed by pairs {(i, j) | 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n, i 6= j}.
They can be defined by
                              αi,j := xH     H
                                       i,i /xj,j

Hereafter when discussing elements of Rσ we identify the pair of integers
(σ(i), i) ∈ Rσ with the root ασ(i),i .
Proposition 8.5. Let | · |wb be the standard absolute value associated to
w    b Fix σ ∈ WH . Let Rσ be the set of roots associated to σ as in
b on L.
                           DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                                51


Proposition 4.6. Assume Bub ⊆ G(F)   b is pre-compact. The following holds
              (s,t)
for any g ∈ Bub
                                    Y                              
                                               s            t
                ΨH  σ (g) w
                          b
                            ≪ H,Bub
                                      min  |α(a  )|wb , |α(a  )|wb
                                     α∈Rσ

Proof. Our starting point is Lemma 8.4. We raise the expression for ΨH
                                                                     σ to
the n’th power                                               n
                                               n
                                                Y xH
                                                   σ(i),i
                           H n                n
                         Ψσ      = (sign σ)
                                                         det
                                               i=1
We claim that for each 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n the function
                                        n
                        g H
                        xi,j :=   xσ(i),i · (det)−1
                                   H


is a regular function on GLb . Recall that regular functions on PGL1 (B)
extend to regular functions on G by the fixed isogeny G → PGL1 (B).
Using the isomorphism ξ defined in (21) we can reduce this claim to the
analogues claim for PGLn .
   We look closer at the coordinate rings. The ring of regular functions
                           b i,j , (det)−1 ]1≤i,j≤n and the regular functions
on GLn,Lb is a quotient of L[x
on PGL b are the elements of degree zero in L[GL  b    n ], where the degree is
         n,L
defined the same as for regular polynomials except that the degree of (det)−1
is −n. Our functions gxH are degree zero, hence they are regular.
                         i,j
  From the definition of αi,j and xH
                                   i,j we see that for any h ∈ H
                                                      H
                           xH
                            i,j ◦ Ad(h) = αi,j (h) · xi,j

We define αi,i to be the trivial character for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, viz. xH
                                                                    i,i is invariant
under conjugation by h.
  The following holds for the normalized n’th power functions
                          g
                          x                      g
                            H ◦ Ad(h) = α (h)n · x H .
                            i,j          i,j       i,j

   As the functions g
                    xH
                     i,j are regular ones they are continuous with respect
to the Hausdorff topology on G(L),b in particular |g
                                                   xH | is bounded on the
                                                               i,j u
                                                                   b
pre-compact set Bub . Therefore for g ∈ Ad(h)(Bub )

                     |g
                      xH                     n
                               b ≤ |αi,j (h)|w
                       i,j (g)|w
                                                      gH
                                             b · sup |xi,j (g)|w
                                                               b
                                                 g∈Bub
                                  (s,t)
  We conclude that for g ∈ Bub       the following estimate holds
                                                                    
(22)             |g
                  xH                            s n
                           b ≪H,Bub min |αi,j (a )|w
                   i,j (g)|w
                                                               t n
                                                   b , |αi,j (a )|w
                                                                  b

Notice that for i = j the character αi,i is trivial and the bound does not
depend on s and t.
52                                 I. KHAYUTIN

  The proposition follows from multiplying the estimates (22) for all (σ(i), i),
1 ≤ i ≤ n, and taking the positive n’th root.                                

8.3. Small Bowen Balls. Recall that H < GFb is a maximal torus defined
     b = Fub. Assume henceforth that H is isotropic over F,
over F                                                   b viz. rankb H > 0.
                                                                    F
                b We consider H as embedded in GS in the natural way.
   Let H := H(F).
The isotropy assumption is necessary for H to have non-trivial dynamics on
  GS
Γ\ .
   The main result of this section is Theorem 8.9 below. The entropy lower
bound presented in Theorem 1.2 follows from Theorem 8.9 using well known
methods going back essentially to Linnik [Lin68]. In their modern form
they have been developed in [ELMV09, ELMV12, EMV13]. To formulate
Theorem 8.9 we need a few definitions regarding homogeneous toral sets.

Definition 8.6. A homogeneous toral set G(F)\T(A)gA , gA = (gu )u∈VF ,
such that Hub := gub −1 TFb gub = H is called an H-invariant homogeneous toral
set. The projection of Y to Γ\GS using the map from (20) is called an H-
invariant packet. Notice that u     b belongs to S by assumption so that the
group H has a well-defined action on Γ\GS .

Definition 8.7. Let Y = G(F)\T(A)gA be a homogeneous toral with local
discriminants (Du )u∈VF . Let Vram be the set of finite F-places where B is
ramified. We define the ramified discriminant to be
                                       Y
                             Dram :=       Du
                                        u∈Vram

Definition 8.8. Let Y = G(F)\T(A)gA be a homogeneous toral set. We
say the Y is a homogeneous toral set of maximal type if for any finite u the
order Ru := Ωu ∩ Cu (Fu ) from §7.1 is maximal in the étale algebra Cu (Fu ).
Equivalently, the homogeneous toral set is of maximal type if the associated
global order R is maximal in K.

8.3.1. For a ∈ H and an a-invariant probability measure µ on Γ\GS we
have denoted by hµ (a) the Kolmogorov-Sinai entropy of the measure µ with
respect to the Z action by a. Let m be the Haar measure on Γ\GS and let
g− be the subspace of the Lie algebra Lie(G(F))   b which is spanned over L    b by
the eigenvalues of Ada of modulus < 1. Then
                                                    1   X
   hHaar (a) := hm (a) = − log | det Ada ↾g− |ub =            | log |αi,j (a)|wb |
                                                   2fwb
                                                       1≤i6=j≤n

Where the absolute value on the outside each log |αi,j (a)|ub is the regular
absolute value on R and |x|wb = |x|fubwb for each x ∈ F,
                                                      b i.e. fwb is the inertia
          b F.
degree of L/ b
                         DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                             53

Theorem 8.9. Let Y = G(F)T(A)gA be an H-invariant homogeneous toral
set of maximal type with discriminant D and ramified local discriminant
Dram . Let L be the splitting field of T. Assume G := Gal(L/F) is 2-
transitive.                    Q
   Let a ∈ H and fix B = u∈S Bu such that for all u        b 6= u ∈ S non-
archimedean the set Bu is contained in Ku .
   There exists a constant κ depending only on B, F and H such that if
τ > 0 satisfies
                        hHaar (a)                
                                              n/2
(23)                  2           τ > log DDram     +κ
                         n−1
                                     
                         (−τ,τ )
Then G(F) ∩ T(A)gA Bu            × K S gA −1 T(A) is contained in T(F).

Proof. For now let κ be a free variable and let
                                               
              λ ∈ G(F) ∩ T(A)gA Bu(−τ,τ ) × K S gA −1 T(A)

Denote by W be the absolute Weyl group of T.

Galois orbits. Recall that by Proposition 6.5 we can consider G as a sub-
group of W .
  Fix σ ∈ W . By Proposition 6.6 the Galois orbit of ΨT
                                                      σ (λ) ∈ OL is
                            T
                            Ψτ στ −1 (λ) | τ ∈ G
                
  Denote C := τ στ −1 | τ ∈ G and let |C | be the cardinality of C . We
now define
                                     Y
                         ΨC (λ) :=       ΨTω (λ) ∈ F
                                     ω∈C

Archimedean bound for ΨC (λ). For each archimedean place u 6= u   b of F let m
be the number of places w|u of L. Recall that we treat each pair of conjugate
complex embedding as genuinely different places. Applying Proposition 7.7
                 (−τ,τ )
and using that Bu        = Bu for all archimedean u 6= ub we have
                                Y
                  |ΨC (λ)|mu =     |ΨC (λ)|w ≤ (κ0 Du )|C |m
                               w|u

The constant κ0 > 0 depends on B only. Set κ1 := max(κ0 , 1).
  Taking the positive real root of order m we have the necessary bound
                                           |C |
(24)                        |ΨC (λ)|u ≤ κ1 Du|C |

Nonarchimedean bound for ΨC (λ). Recall that if u ∈ S then Bu ⊆ Ku . For
all non-archimedean u 6= u
                         b we have
                         λ ∈ T(Fu )gu Ku gu −1 T(Fu )
54                                    I. KHAYUTIN

For each non-archimedean place u 6= u    b of F where B is ramified we apply
Proposition 7.4
                                              Y
          |ΨC (λ)|[L
                  u
                     : F]
                          = |NrL/F ΨC (λ)|u =   |ΨC (λ)|w
                                                   w|u
                            Y
                        ≤         |Du |−|C
                                       w
                                           |
                                             = |NrL/F Du |−|C
                                                          u
                                                              |
                                                                = Du|C |[L : F]
                            w|u

  If B is ramified at u 6= u
                           b we apply the weaker Proposition 7.5 and have
similarly
                       |ΨC (λ)|[L
                               u
                                  : F]
                                       ≤ Du(1+n/2)|C |[L : F]
  Taking the positive real root of order [L : F] we have the necessary bounds
                        (
                             |C |
                          Du              If B is unramified at u
(25)       |ΨC (λ)|u ≤       (1+n/2)|C |
                          Du              Otherwise

Exponential bound. It will be now important to choose σ that has no fixed
points. We are going to calculate the exponential bound on |ΨC (λ)|ub .
  Let b  b be the splitting field of H and denote by w
       L/F                                              b place of b
                                                                   L. Using
Proposition 8.5 we deduce that
                                                               !
                           |C |
                                       X   X
(26)         |ΨC (λ)|wb ≤ κ2 exp −τ             |log |α(a)|wb |
                                              ω∈C α∈Rω

Where k2 > 0 depends only on B. Notice that the outer absolute value of
| log |α(a)|wb | is the usual absolute value on R.
    As ΨC (λ) belongs to F it can be considered as an element of F.b Inequality
(26) implies
                                                                  !
                               |C |       τ X X
                 |ΨC (λ)|ub ≤ κ2 exp −             |log |α(a)|wb |
                                         fwb
                                               ω∈C α∈Rω

   How many times each root of H appears in the sum above? Because G
is 2-transitive it is easy to see that all the roots appear in the sum with the
same multiplicity. There are n(n − 1) roots in total. Each ω ∈ C contributes
the same number of roots to the sum as σ, which contributes exactly n of
them as it has no fixed points. Hence each root appears in the sum with
multiplicity
                                   n|C |       |C |
                                           =
                                n(n − 1)     n−1
  In the expression for 2hHaar (a) each root appears with multiplicity 1. We
conclude that
                                                           
                                |C |        hHaar (a)
(27)              |ΨC (λ)|ub ≤ κ2 exp −2              |C |τ
                                              n−1
                         DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                                55

Triviality of ΨC (λ). For each place of u 6= u
                                             b we apply either bound (24) or
(25) appropriately. For the place u = u  b we apply the exponential bound
(27). Combining these we have
                  Y
   NrA ΨC (λ) :=      |ΨC (λ)|u
                 u∈VF
                           |C |                                         
                 [F : Q]              −|C | |C | n/2|C |   hHaar (a)
              ≤ κ1       κ2       Dub      D Dram exp −2             |C |τ
                                                            n−1
                                                                [F : Q]
The local discriminant Dub depends only on H. Define κ3 = κ1     κ2 Du−1
                                                                      b , it
depends only on B, F and H.
  We see that if
                                            
       |C | |C | n/2|C |      hHaar (a)
     κ3 D Dram exp −2                   |C |τ < 1
                               n−1
                                   hHaar (a)              
                                                       n/2
                             ⇐⇒ 2            τ > log DDram   + log κ3
                                     n−1
Then NrA ΨC (λ) < 1. But ΨC (λ) ∈ F and from the product formula for the
number field F we deduce that ΨC (λ) = 0.
Finishing the proof. We are now ready to set κ = log κ3 . We have shown
that if inequality (23) holds then ΨC (λ) = 0. This in turn implies that there
exists τ ∈ G such that ΨT  τ στ −1 (λ) = 0.
  By Corollary 6.7 the projection of λ ∈ G(F) to T \\G// T is TeT. Now
we can use Proposition 3.7 to conclude that there exits t ∈ T(F) such that
λ = t and the claim is proved.                                              
8.4. Proof of the Entropy Lower Bound. We now prove our lower
bound on the asymptotic entropy. The reader should remember that our
final argument is an extension of a rank 1 argument which is weaker then
Linnik’s powerful method. Indeed, in rank 1 Linnik’s results are akin to
an optimal bound on the entropy [Lin68, ELMV12]. A generalization of
Linnik’s basic lemma and a finer analysis of integral points on the variety
T\\G//T in conjugation with the Galois action remain open.
   In addition we have no contribution to the question of escape of mass
in the non-cocompact case. We assume a priori that mass does not escape.
This is unnecessary if B is a division algebra as congruence lattices are
co-compact in that case.
Theorem (1.2). Suppose we have a sequence of H-invariant homogeneous
toral sets of maximal type Yi = G(F)\Ti (A)gi with Ti a torus defined and
anisotropic over F and gi ∈ GA . Let Li /F be the splitting field of Ti . We
assume for all i that Gal(Li /F) is 2-transitive.
   Denote by Di the global discriminant of Yi . Assume Di →i→∞ ∞. Let
Dram,i be the ramified discriminant of Yi which is the product of local dis-
                                                                     o(1)
criminant at finite places where B is ramified. Suppose Dram,i = Di
56                                    I. KHAYUTIN


   Let µi be the probability measure on Γ\GS induced by the probability mea-
sure on the homogeneous toral set Yi using (20). If µi converges in the
weak-∗ topology to a probability measure µ on Γ\GS then for any a ∈ H we
have
                                       hHaar (a)
                              hµ (a) ≥
                                       2(n − 1)
Remark 8.10. The volume of the packet is known to be equal to Di 1/2+o(1) ,
see [ELMV11, Theorem 4.8]. Although the proof in [ELMV11] is written
for the case B = Mn it applies verbatim to any central simple algebra B.
Notice that any torus in B over a local field can be embedded in Mn with
the same local order11 Ru . The computation of the volume depends only on
this data if the norms are chosen consistently.
Proof of Theorem 1.2. The theorem follows from combining Theorem 8.9
with Proposition 8.2 ([ELMV09, Proposition 3.2]).
The necessary bound on Bowen balls. We define
                                          hHaar (a)
                                     η=
                                           n−1
                                                        (−τ,τ )
Choose B as in Theorem 8.9 and such that Bub           ⊆ Bub for all12 τ ≥ 0.
Proposition 8.2 implies that the theorem would follow if for each ε > 0
we can find a sequence of positive integers τi →i→∞ ∞ such that for any
compact F ⊂ Γ\GS
           Z                 
(28)          µi xB (−τi ,τi ) dµi (x) ≪F,F,B,H,ε exp(−(η − ε)τi )
                F

  Let Zi ⊂ Γ\GS be the projection of Yi . By choosing τi appropriately, we
are going to show that inequality (28) holds individually for any Bowen ball
xB (−τi ,τi ) with x ∈ Zi . This will imply the theorem.
Volume of a small Bowen ball. Theorem 8.9 suggests that we choose
                          
                      n/2
             log Di Dram,i           log (Di ) (1 + o(1))
(29)    τi =                 +κ+1 =                       +κ+1
                   2η                         2η
  Fix x ∈ Zi and let q = δ0 t0 gi k0 ∈ G(F)Ti (A)gi K S be an adelic repre-
sentative of x. We can now bound the measure of the Bowen ball around
x corresponding to τi . Recall that the measure µi is the projection of the
adelic measure on the homogeneous toral set to Γ\GS . For simplicity we
use the notation µi for both measures. Also, we denote by µTi the Haar
measure on Ti normalized so that T (F)\Ti (A) has volume 1.
                                           i

     11In the archimedean case with R comparable as convex sets.
                                      u
     12This can be done by choosing in the Lie algebra Lie(G)(b
                                                              F) a small enough identity
neighborhood fulfilling an analogues condition and taking its image under the exponent.
                          DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                               57


                                                            
     µi ΓxB (−τi ,τi ) = µi G(F)δ0 t0 gi ks B (−τi ,τi ) × K S
                                      
     = µi G(F)t0 gi B (−τi ,τi ) × K S
                                                                      
     = µTi t ∈ Ti (A) | ∃δ ∈ G(F) : δtgi ∈ δ0 t0 gi B (−τi ,τi ) × K S
                                                                            
(30) = µTi t ∈ Ti (A) | ∃δ ∈ G(F) : δ0−1 δt ∈ t0 · gi B (−τi ,τi ) × K S gi −1

For any δ ∈ G(F) contributing to the measure of the Bowen ball in (30) we
have that λ = δ0−1 δ fulfills the condition of Theorem 8.9, so λ ∈ Ti (F). In
particular, it is enough to take in (30) only δ = δ0 . This implies
                                                                        
   µi ΓxB (−τi ,τi ) = µTi t ∈ Ti (A) | t ∈ t0 · gi B (−τi ,τi ) × K S gi −1
                                                                      
                      = µTi t ∈ Ti (A) | t ∈ gi B (−τi ,τi ) × K S gi −1
                                                                 
                      ≤ µTi t ∈ Ti (A) | t ∈ gi B × K S gi −1
                                         −1/2−o(1)
(31)                 ≍B vol(Yi )−1 = Di
Where the last equality is [ELMV11, Theorem 4.8] (see Remark 8.10).
 Combining (29) and (31) and setting κ′ = 2η(κ + 1) we see that
                                                  
             (−τi ,τi )                1
      µi xB               ≤ exp −        + o(1) log Di
                                       2
                                                                    
                                       1                             ′
                          = exp −        + o(1) (2ητi /(1 + o(1)) − κ )
                                       2
                          ≪κ′ ,ε exp (−(η − ε)τi )
This concludes the proof of Theorem 1.2.                                       

                     9. Rigidity of Limit Measures
   We now combine Theorem 1.2 with measure rigidity for higher rank torus
actions. Specifically, we are going to use the results of [EL15] which gener-
alizes [EKL06].
   The following proposition is a simple analogue of [ELMV09, Theorem 5.1]
combined with the improved entropy bounds of Theorem 1.2. Its proof is
standard and follows the same lines as [ELMV09, Theorem 5.1].
Proposition 9.1. We assume for simplicity F = Q. Let u        b ∈ S and denote
b                                                        b
F := Fub. Fix a maximal torus H < GFb defined over F and set H := H(F).     b
Assume that H is split over F. b
   Suppose we have a sequence of H-invariant homogeneous toral sets of
maximal type Yi = G(F)\Ti (A)gi with Ti a torus defined and anisotropic
over F and gi ∈ GA . Let Li /F be the splitting field of Ti . We assume for all
i that Gal(Li /F) is 2-transitive.
58                                     I. KHAYUTIN

   Denote by Di the global discriminant of Yi and by Dram,i the ramified
                                                           o(1)
discriminant of Yi . Assume Di →i→∞ ∞ and Dram,i = Di .
   Let µi be the probability measure on Γ\GS induced by the probability mea-
sure on the homogeneous toral set Yi . If µi converges in the weak-∗ topology
to a probability measure µ on Γ\GS then
                                    Z
                                µ ≥ ν dτ (ν)

Where τ is a finite measure on the space of H-invariant Borel probability
measures on Γ\GS and
   (1) For τ -almost every ν there is a reductive algebraic subgroup L < G
       defined and anisotropic over Q and some g ∈ GS such that ν is the
       unique g−1 L(QS )g invariant measure supported on the periodic orbit
         L(QS )g . Moreover, H < g −1 L(F)g  b ub and ν is H ergodic.
       Γ\                              u
                                       b
   (2) For any a ∈ H we have
                     Z
                                                 hHaar (a)
                        hν (a) dτ (ν) = hµ (a) ≥
                                                 2(n − 1)
                      R               1
       In particular, dτ (ν) ≥ 2(n−1)    .

Remark 9.2. The reductive subgroups L < G appearing in the decomposi-
                        b a maximal split torus of Gb . In particular, Lb is
tion above include over F                            F                  F
a reductive subgroup of maximal rank of the split group GFb which has type
An . By the Borel-de Siebenthal algorithm [BDS49] adapted to algebraic
groups, LFb is an almost-direct product of a torus and groups of type Ak
with k ≤ n.
Proof. Decompose µ into H-invariant and ergodic probability measures
                                 Z
                            µ = ν de  τ (ν)

where τe is a probability measure on the space of H-invariant Borel proba-
bility measures on Γ\GS supported on the H ergodic measures. Let P>0 be
the Borel set13 of H-invariant probability measures ν such that hν (a) > 0
for some a ∈ H. Define
                                 τ = τe↾P>0
                 R
Obviously, µ ≥ ν dτ (ν) and (2) follows from the linearity of the entropy
with respect to a fixed a ∈ H when considered as a function on the convex
set of Borel probability measures on Γ\GS .

   13 To see that this is a Borel set in the space of probability measures fix a countable
                                                                     S
dense subset {ai }i=1 of the separable space H. It holds that P>0 = ∞  i=1 {ν | hν (ai ) > 0}.
Each sets in this union is Borel because we can compute the entropy using a countable
set of finite partitions of Γ\GS that generate together the whole σ-algebra.
                                DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                              59

   Assertion (1) is a direct consequences of [EL15, Theorem 1.1 and Remark
after Corollary 1.2] combined with the fact that, by definition of τ , hν (a) > 0
for some a ∈ H for τ -almost all ν.                                            

   The following corollary is a modest qualitative restriction on possible limit
measures arising from the entropy bound.
                                       R
Corollary 9.3. Fix R ∈ N. Let µ ≥ ν dτ (ν) be as in Proposition 9.1. Let
L < G be a reductive subgroup of maximal rank, such that the rank of all its
simple parts (of type Ak ) is less then R.
   Set NR = (R + 2)(R + 1)R − 1. If the absolute rank of G is greater
then NR − 1, then τ ({ν}) < 1 for each ν supported on a periodic orbit of a
conjugate of L(QS ), namely, µ is not supported on a single periodic orbit of
type L.

Proof. Assume ν is an H-invariant and ergodic probability measure on Γ\G
corresponding to the periodic orbit Γ\L(QS )g . Set e
                                                    L := g−1 LFb g – a reductive
                           b Recall that H < L
split algebraic group over F.                   e is a maximal split torus.
  Let  : SL b × . . . × SL b × T0 → L,e where T0 is a torus defined over F,  b
             k1 , F               kl , F
be the obvious isogeny from the simply connected cover to L,       e see Remark
9.2. Let Hi < SLki ,Fb a maximal torus whose image under  is contained in
H. By replacing  with a composition of  with an inner automorphism of
e we can assure that H =  (Q Hi × T0 ).
L                                i
                                                       b if u
   Denote by q the cardinality of the residue field of F    b is non-archimedean
                  b is archimedean. Then by choosing an element ai ∈ Hi (b
or q := exp(1) if u                                                           F)
             b                             14
and t0 ∈ T0 (F) similarly to Remark 1.3 for a := (a1 , . . . , al , t0 ) ∈ H we
have

                  (n + 1)n(n − 1)
       hHaar (a) =                  log q
                          6
                l
                X  (ki + 1)ki (ki − 1)         n (R + 2)(R + 1)R
       hν (a) =                        log q ≤                   log q
                            6                  2        6
                      i=1

and
                                                   1
(32)                        hµ (a)/hHaar (a) ≥
                                               2(n − 1)
                                               (R + 2)(R + 1)R
(33)                        hν (a)/hHaar (a) ≤
                                                2(n + 1)(n − 1)


  14Instead of exp((n − j)/2) one puts ̟ (n−j)/2 where ̟ is a uniformizer for b
                                                                              F if u
                                                                                   b is
non-archimedean and ̟ = exp(1) otherwise.
60                                   I. KHAYUTIN

     Using the inequality
                 Z
         hµ (a) = hν ′ (a) dτ (ν ′ ) ≤ hν (a)ν({τ }) + hHaar (a)(1 − ν({τ }))

                                hHaar (a) − hµ (a)
                =⇒ ν({τ }) ≤
                                hHaar (a) − hν (a)

together with inequalities (32) and (33) we conclude that ν({τ }) < 1 if
n > (R + 2)(R + 1)R − 1.                                              


                                    References
[AG60]   Maurice Auslander and Oscar Goldman. Maximal orders. Trans. Amer. Math.
         Soc., 97:1–24, 1960.
[BDS49]  A. Borel and J. De Siebenthal. Les sous-groupes fermés de rang maximum des
         groupes de Lie clos. Comment. Math. Helv., 23:200–221, 1949.
[Bha04]  Manjul Bhargava. Higher composition laws. II. On cubic analogues of Gauss
         composition. Ann. of Math. (2), 159(2):865–886, 2004.
[Bor63]  Armand Borel. Some finiteness properties of adele groups over number fields.
         Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math., (16):5–30, 1963.
[Cas86]  J. W. S. Cassels. Local fields, volume 3 of London Mathematical Society Student
         Texts. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1986.
[Con12]  Brian Conrad. Finiteness theorems for algebraic groups over function fields.
         Compos. Math., 148(2):555–639, 2012.
[Dol03]  Igor Dolgachev. Lectures on invariant theory, volume 296 of London Mathe-
         matical Society Lecture Note Series. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
         2003.
[Duk88]  W. Duke. Hyperbolic distribution problems and half-integral weight Maass
         forms. Invent. Math., 92(1):73–90, 1988.
[EK12]   Manfred Einsiedler and Shirali Kadyrov. Entropy and escape of mass for
         SL3 (Z)\SL3 (R). Israel J. Math., 190:253–288, 2012.
[EKL06]  Manfred Einsiedler, Anatole Katok, and Elon Lindenstrauss. Invariant mea-
         sures and the set of exceptions to Littlewood’s conjecture. Ann. of Math. (2),
         164(2):513–560, 2006.
[EKP15]  M. Einsiedler, S. Kadyrov, and A. Pohl. Escape of mass and entropy for diag-
         onal flows in real rank one situations. Israel J. Math., 210(1):245–295, 2015.
[EL15]   Manfred Einsiedler and Elon Lindenstrauss. On measures invariant under tori
         on quotients of semisimple groups. Ann. of Math. (2), 181(3):993–1031, 2015.
[ELMV09] Manfred Einsiedler, Elon Lindenstrauss, Philippe Michel, and Akshay
         Venkatesh. Distribution of periodic torus orbits on homogeneous spaces. Duke
         Math. J., 148(1):119–174, 2009.
[ELMV11] Manfred Einsiedler, Elon Lindenstrauss, Philippe Michel, and Akshay
         Venkatesh. Distribution of periodic torus orbits and Duke’s theorem for cu-
         bic fields. Ann. of Math. (2), 173(2):815–885, 2011.
[ELMV12] Manfred Einsiedler, Elon Lindenstrauss, Philippe Michel, and Akshay
         Venkatesh. The distribution of closed geodesics on the modular surface, and
         Duke’s theorem. Enseign. Math. (2), 58(3-4):249–313, 2012.
[EMV13] Jordan S. Ellenberg, Philippe Michel, and Akshay Venkatesh. Linnik’s ergodic
         method and the distribution of integer points on spheres. In Automorphic
         representations and L-functions, volume 22 of Tata Inst. Fundam. Res. Stud.
         Math., pages 119–185. Tata Inst. Fund. Res., Mumbai, 2013.
                            DOUBLE TORUS QUOTIENTS                                   61

[GS06]   Philippe Gille and Tamás Szamuely. Central simple algebras and Galois co-
         homology, volume 101 of Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Cam-
         bridge University Press, Cambridge, 2006.
[Iwa87]  Henryk Iwaniec. Fourier coefficients of modular forms of half-integral weight.
         Invent. Math., 87(2):385–401, 1987.
[Kad12a] Shirali Kadyrov. Entropy and escape of mass for Hilbert modular spaces. J.
         Lie Theory, 22(3):701–722, 2012.
[Kad12b] Shirali Kadyrov. Positive entropy invariant measures on the space of lattices
         with escape of mass. Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 32(1):141–157, 2012.
[Kem78]  George R. Kempf. Instability in invariant theory. Ann. of Math. (2),
         108(2):299–316, 1978.
[Kha17]  Ilya Khayutin. Large deviations and effective equidistribution. Int. Math. Res.
         Not. IMRN, (10):3050–3106, 2017.
[KKLM17] S. Kadyrov, D. Kleinbock, E. Lindenstrauss, and G. A. Margulis. Singular
         systems of linear forms and non-escape of mass in the space of lattices. J.
         Anal. Math., 133:253–277, 2017.
[Kön16] Dénes König. Über Graphen und ihre Anwendung auf Determinantentheorie
         und Mengenlehre. Math. Ann., 77(4):453–465, 1916.
[KP15]   S. Kadyrov and A. Pohl. Amount of failure of upper-semicontinuity of entropy
         in non-compact rank-one situations, and hausdorff dimension. Ergodic Theory
         and Dynamical Systems, FirstView:1–25, 10 2015.
[Lin57]  Yu. V. Linnik. Asymptotic-geometric and ergodic properties of sets of lattice
         points on a sphere. Mat. Sb. N.S., 43(85):257–276, 1957.
[Lin60]  Yu. V. Linnik. Asymptotic-geometric and ergodic properties of sets of lattice
         points on a sphere. Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. (2), 13:9–27, 1960.
[Lin68]  Yu. V. Linnik. Ergodic properties of algebraic fields. Translated from the Rus-
         sian by M. S. Keane. Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete, Band
         45. Springer-Verlag New York Inc., New York, 1968.
[LM99]   David B. Leep and Gerry Myerson. Marriage, magic, and solitaire. Amer.
         Math. Monthly, 106(5):419–429, 1999.
[LW01]   Elon Lindenstrauss and Barak Weiss. On sets invariant under the action of
         the diagonal group. Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 21(5):1481–1500, 2001.
[MFK94] D. Mumford, J. Fogarty, and F. Kirwan. Geometric invariant theory, vol-
         ume 34 of Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (2) [Results in
         Mathematics and Related Areas (2)]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, third edition,
         1994.
[Nag64]  Masayoshi Nagata. Invariants of a group in an affine ring. J. Math. Kyoto
         Univ., 3:369–377, 1963/1964.
[PV94]   Vladimir L Popov and Ernest B Vinberg. Invariant theory. In Algebraic geom-
         etry IV, pages 123–278. Springer, 1994.
[Rei75]  I. Reiner. Maximal orders. Academic Press [A subsidiary of Harcourt Brace Jo-
         vanovich, Publishers], London-New York, 1975. London Mathematical Society
         Monographs, No. 5.
[S+ 15]  W. A. Stein et al. Sage Mathematics Software (Version 6.8). The Sage Devel-
         opment Team, 2015. http://www.sagemath.org.
[Ser02]  Jean-Pierre Serre. Galois cohomology. Springer Monographs in Mathematics.
         Springer-Verlag, Berlin, english edition, 2002. Translated from the French by
         Patrick Ion and revised by the author.
[Sku62]  B. F. Skubenko. The asymptotic distribution of integers on a hyperboloid of
         one sheet and ergodic theorems. Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat., 26:721–752,
         1962.
[Woo14]  Melanie Matchett Wood. Parametrization of ideal classes in rings associated
         to binary forms. J. Reine Angew. Math., 689:169–199, 2014.
62                             I. KHAYUTIN

  Department of Mathematics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544,
USA

  School of Mathematics, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ 08540,
USA
