Found Comput Math
DOI 10.1007/s10208-009-9056-2




Boundary Measures for Geometric Inference

Frédéric Chazal · David Cohen-Steiner ·
Quentin Mérigot




Received: 6 February 2009 / Revised: 29 October 2009 / Accepted: 29 October 2009
© SFoCM 2009


Abstract We study the boundary measures of compact subsets of the d-dimensional
Euclidean space, which are closely related to Federer’s curvature measures. We show
that they can be computed efficiently for point clouds and suggest that these measures
can be used for geometric inference. The main contribution of this work is the proof of
a quantitative stability theorem for boundary measures using tools of convex analysis
and geometric measure theory. As a corollary we obtain a stability result for Federer’s
curvature measures of a compact set, showing that they can be reliably estimated from
point-cloud approximations.

Keywords Geometric inference · Curvature measures · Convex functions · Nearest
neighbors · Point clouds

Mathematics Subject Classification (2000) 52A39 · 51K10 · 49Q15


1 Introduction

Recently there has been a growing interest in applying geometric methods to data
analysis. This approach uses well-known geometric or topological properties such as


Communicated by Herbert Edelsbrunner.
F. Chazal
Geometrica, INRIA Saclay, Orsay, France

D. Cohen-Steiner · Q. Mérigot ()
Geometrica, INRIA Sophia-Antipolis, Sophia-Antipolis, France
e-mail: Quentin.Merigot@sophia.inria.fr
                                                                      Found Comput Math

curvature and intrinsic dimension in order to describe and understand the structure of
data represented by high dimensional point clouds.
   The general problem of geometric inference can be stated as follows: given a noisy
point-cloud approximation C of a compact set K ⊆ Rd , how can we recover geomet-
ric and topological information about K, such as its curvature, sharp edges, bound-
aries, Betti numbers, or Euler–Poincaré characteristic, etc., knowing only the point
cloud C?

Previous Work For smooth surfaces embedded in R3 , inference problems are by
now well mastered. In particular, several algorithms (e.g. [2]) allow us to reconstruct
a topologically correct and geometrically close piecewise-linear approximation from
a sufficiently dense point cloud. From these reconstructions, differential quantities
such as curvature tensors can be reliably estimated [10]. Most of these surface recon-
struction algorithms are based on the study of the shape of Voronoi cells for points
sampled on smooth surfaces. For smooth submanifolds in higher dimensional spaces,
similar ideas lead to provable local dimension estimation algorithms [12]. It has also
been shown that appropriate offsets, or equivalently α-shapes [13], provided recon-
structions with the correct homotopy type [16] under sampling conditions similar to
the one used in 3 dimensional surface reconstruction. This last result was recently ex-
tended to compact sets more general than smooth submanifolds [6], using a weaker
sampling condition. Unfortunately, all these approaches are impractical in high di-
mensions since they require computing the Voronoi diagram, which has exponential
complexity with respect to ambient dimension. Finally, it has been shown that per-
sistent homology can be used to reliably estimate Betti numbers of a wide class of
compact sets under an even weaker sampling condition [8, 9]. Computing persistent
homology used to require the computation of a Delaunay triangulation, which is im-
practical in high dimension. However, approximate computations are made possible
by using witness complexes [11]. This approach proved useful in particular in the
study of the space of natural images [5].
    As described above, substantial progress was recently made for inferring topo-
logical invariants of possibly nonsmooth sampled objects embedded in arbitrary di-
mensional spaces. However, very little is known on how to infer more geometric
invariants, such as curvatures or singularities, for such objects. In this paper, we ad-
dress this problem from a particular angle. Given a compact set K ⊆ Rd , our ap-
proach consists in exploiting the geometric information contained in the growth of
the volume of its offsets K r = {x ∈ Rd ; d(x, K) ⩽ r}. The well-known tube formula
states that for smooth [21] or convex [19] objects, this volume is a polynomial in r
provided r is small enough. The coefficients of this polynomial, called intrinsic vol-
umes, Lipschitz–Killing curvatures, Minkowski functionals, or Quermassintegrale in
the literature, encode important geometric information about K, such as dimension,
curvatures, angles of sharp features, or even Euler characteristic. Federer [14] later
showed that such a polynomial behavior actually always holds as long as r does not
exceed the reach of K, which is well known in computational geometry as the (min-
imum of) the local feature size, that is, the minimum distance between K and its
medial axis. Also, he introduced the important notion of curvature measure, which,
loosely speaking, details the contribution of each part of K to the intrinsic volumes,
Found Comput Math

and hence gives local information about curvatures, dimensions, and sharp feature
angles.

Contributions Curvature measures have been studied extensively in differential
geometry [21] and geometric measure theory [14]. In this paper, we show that they
can also prove useful from the perspective of geometric inference.
   Given a compact set K ⊆ Rd , we define the boundary measure of K at scale r as
the mass distribution μK,K r on K such that μK,K r (B) is the contribution of a region
B ⊂ K to the volume of K r . The tube formula states that, when K has positive reach,
the curvature measures of K can be retrieved if one knows the boundary measures at
several scales. The usability of boundary measures for geometric inference depends
on the following two questions:
1. is it practically feasible to compute the boundary measure of a point cloud
   C ⊆ Rd ?
2. if C is a good approximation of K (i.e. dense enough and without too much noise),
   does the boundary measure μC,C r carry approximately the same geometric infor-
   mation as μK,K r ?
The answer to the first question is given in Sect. 5 in the form of a very simple Monte
Carlo algorithm allowing us to compute the boundary measure of a point cloud C
embedded in the space Rd . Standard arguments show that if C has n points, an
ε-approximation of μC,C r can be obtained with high probability (e.g. 99%) in time
O(dn2 ln(1/ε)/ε 2 ) without using any sophisticated data structure. A more careful
analysis shows that the n2 behavior can be replaced by n times an appropriate cov-
ering number of C, which indicates that the cost is linear both in n and d for low
entropy point clouds. Hence this algorithm is practical, at least for moderate size
point clouds in high dimension.
   The main contribution of this article is the proof of a stability theorem for bound-
ary measures, which also gives a positive and quantitative answer to the second ques-
tion. The following statement is a simplified version of the theorem. The set of com-
pact subsets of Rd is endowed with the Hausdorff distance dH , and the set of mass
distributions on Rd with the bounded-Lipschitz distance dbL (which will be defined
in Sect. 4).

Theorem 1.1 For every compact set K ⊆ Rd , there exists some constant C(K) such
that
                       dbL (μK,K r , μC,C r ) ⩽ C(K)dH (C, K)1/2
as soon as dH (C, K) is small enough.

    In the sequel we will make this statement more precise by giving explicit con-
stants. A similar stability result for a generalization of curvature measures is deduced
from this theorem. At the heart of these two stability results is an L1 stability property
for (closest point) projections on compact sets. The proof of the projection stability
theorem involves a new inequality in convex analysis, which may also be interesting
in its own right. Recall that a subset S of Rd is called (d − 1)-rectifiable if it can be
written as a countable union of patches of Lipschitz hypersurfaces (see e.g. [15]).
                                                                        Found Comput Math

Theorem 1.2 Let E be an open subset of Rd with (d − 1)-rectifiable boundary, and
f, g be two convex functions such that diam(∇f (E) ∪ ∇g(E)) ⩽ k. Then there exists
a constant C(d, E, k) such that for f − g∞ small enough,

                                                                1/2
                     ∇f − ∇gL1 (E) ⩽ C(d, E, k)f − g∞ .

Outline In Sect. 2 we introduce the mathematical objects involved in this article, in
particular Hausdorff measures, boundary, and curvature measures. In Sect. 3 we prove
the main technical result of this paper concerning the gradient of convex functions and
show how this leads to the projection stability theorem as well as to the stability of
a variant of boundary measures. Section 4 presents the stability result for boundary
measures, from which one can deduce that curvature measures are also stable for the
Hausdorff distance. In Sect. 5 we show how Monte Carlo methods can be applied to
the computation of boundary measures of point clouds.



2 Mathematical Preliminaries

In this section, we introduce the mathematical objects which will be used throughout
the article.

Measures A (nonnegative) measure μ associates to any (Borel) subset B of Rd a
nonnegative number μ(B). It should also enjoy the following
                                                                  additivity property: if
                                                                   
(Bi ) is a countable family of disjoint subsets, then μ( Bi ) = i μ(Bi ). A measure
on Rd should be seen as a mass distribution on Rd , which one can probe using Borel
sets: μ(B) is the mass of μ contained in B. The restriction of a measure μ to a subset
C ⊆ Rd is the measure μ|C defined by μ|C (B) = μ(B ∩ C). The simplest examples
of measures are Dirac masses which, given a point x ∈ Rd , are defined by δx (B) = 1
if and only if x is in B. In what follows, we will also use the k-dimensional Hausdorff
measures Hk which, loosely speaking, associate to any k-dimensional subset of Rd
its k-dimensional area (0 ⩽ k ⩽ d). We refer to [15] for more details. For example, if
S ⊂ Rd is k-dimensional, H|S  k models a mass distribution uniformly distributed on S.



Boundary and Curvature Measures of a Compact Set We begin with some well-
known facts about the distance function and projections on a compact set K ⊆ Rd .
The distance to K is defined as dK (x) = miny∈K x − y. The medial axis of K,
denoted by M(K), is the set of points of Rd \ K which admit more than one closest
point on K (see Fig. 1). The projection on K maps any point x outside the medial
axis to its unique closest point on K, pK (x). Since medial axes always have zero Hd
measure, projections are defined almost everywhere. The r-offset of a subset K ⊆ Rd
is the set of points at distance at most r from K, and is denoted by K r .
    As mentioned in the introduction, there is a lot of geometric information lying in
the intensity of the contribution of a part of K to the volume of K r . To make this
statement precise, we introduce the notion of boundary measure.
Found Comput Math

Fig. 1 Boundary measure of
K ⊂ Rd




Definition If K is a compact subset and E a domain of Rd , the boundary measure
μK,E is defined as follows: for any subset B ⊆ Rd , μK,E (B) is the d-volume of the
set of points of E whose projection on K is in B, i.e.
                                                        
                             μK,E (B) = Hd p−1
                                            K (B ∩ K) ∩ E .


   We will be particularly interested in the boundary measure μK,K r , see Fig. 1.
While the above definition makes sense for any compact K ⊆ Rd , boundary measures
have been mostly studied in the convex case and in the smooth case. Let us first
give two examples in the convex case. Let S be a unit-length segment in the plane
with endpoints a and b. The set S r is the union of a rectangle of dimension 1 × 2r
whose points project on the segment and two half-disks of radius r whose points are
projected on a and b. It follows that
                                              π        π
                             μS,S r = 2rH1 S + r 2 δa + r 2 δb .
                                               2        2

If P is a convex solid polyhedron of R3 , F its faces, E its edges, and V its vertices,
then one can see that
                                                            
          μP ,P r = H3 P + r   H 2 f + r 2     K(e)H1 e + r 3     K(v)δv
                                 f ∈F           e∈E                 v∈V

where K(e) is the angle between the normals of the faces adjacent to the edge e and
K(v) the solid angle formed by the normals of the faces adjacent to v. As shown
by Steiner and Minkowski, for general convex polyhedra the measure μK,K r can be
written as a sum of weighted Hausdorff measures supported on the i-skeleton of K,
and whose local density is the local external dihedral angle.
   Weyl [21] proved that the polynomial behavior for r → μK,K r shown above is
also true for small values of r when K is a compact and smooth submanifold of Rd .
Moreover he also proved that the coefficients of this polynomial can be computed
from the second fundamental form of K. For example, if K is a d-dimensional subset
                                                                               Found Comput Math

with smooth boundary, then we have for sufficiently small r > 0 and for all B ⊂ K,

                                                 
                                                 d
                                  μK,K r (B) =              d−i
                                                       ω i ΦK   (B) r i                    (2.1)
                                                 i=0

where ΦK d (B) is (half of) the d-volume of B and Φ k (k < d) are the (signed) mea-
                                                    K
sures with density given by symmetric functions of the principal curvatures of ∂K:
                                        
             k
            ΦK (B) = const(d, k)                κi(1) (p) . . . κi(k) (p) dp.   (2.2)
                                           B i(1)<···<i(k)


Hence the principal curvatures of K can be retrieved from the curvature measures
 k —at least in principle. Indeed, for every p ∈ ∂K one has
ΦK

                                                                          ΦKk (B(p, r))
 σk (p) :=                   κi(1) (p) . . . κi(k) (p) = const(d, k) lim                    .
                                                                    r→0 Hd−1 (∂K ∩ B(p, r))
             i(1)<···<i(k)

Knowing all the elementary symmetric functions σ1 (p), . . . , σd−1 (p) of the principal
curvatures at p is enough to recover them (up to a permutation). Formulas similar to
(2.1)–(2.2) exist for higher codimension submanifolds (see e.g. [21]). In general, if
K has intrinsic dimension n, then the measures ΦK    k vanish identically when k > n.

Hence, these measures also encode the dimension of K.
    In [14], Federer generalized Steiner’s and Weyl’s tube formula to the class of com-
pact sets with positive reach. A compact set K ⊆ Rd is said to have a reach greater
than R if the minimum distance between K and its medial axis is greater than R, i.e.
if the projection pK is well defined everywhere in the interior of K R . What Federer
showed is that for any compact set K with reach at least R, there exists a unique set
of signed measures ΦK   k , which he called curvature measures, such that (2.1) holds.

From the discussion above, we see that curvature measures encode local dimensions,
angles of sharp features of various dimensions, and principal curvatures. The fol-
lowing generalization of the Gauss–Bonnet theorem shows that they also contain
topological information about K.
                                                      0 (K) is equal to the
Theorem Given any compact set K with positive reach, ΦK
Euler–Poincaré characteristic of K.

   The curvature measures can be retrieved from the knowledge of boundary mea-
sures μK,K r by polynomial fitting (cf. Sect. 4). Hence all the information contained
in curvature measures is also contained in boundary measures, which is our main
motivation for studying them.


3 Stability of Boundary Measures

In this section, we suppose that E is a fixed open set with rectifiable boundary, and
we obtain a quantitative stability theorem for the map K → μK,E . What we mean by
Found Comput Math

stable is that if two compact sets K and K are close, then the measures μK,E and
μK ,E are also close. In order to be able to formulate a precise statement, we need to
choose a notion of distance on the space of compact subsets of Rd and on the set of
measures on Rd .
   To measure the distance between two compact subsets K and K of Rd , we will
use the Hausdorff distance: dH (K, K ) is by definition the smallest positive constant
η such that both K ⊆ K η and K ⊆ K η . It is also the uniform distance between the
two distance functions dK and dK : dH (K, K ) = supx∈Rd |dK (x) − dK (x)|. The next
paragraph describes the distance we use to compare measures.

Wasserstein Distance The Wasserstein distance (of exponent 1) between two mea-
sures μ and ν on Rd having the same total mass μ(Rd ) = ν(Rd ) is a nonnegative
number which quantifies the cost of the optimal transportation from the mass distri-
bution defined by μ to the mass distribution defined by μ (cf. [20]). It is denoted by
dW (μ, ν). More precisely, it is defined as

                            dW (μ, ν) = inf E d(X, Y )
                                          X,Y

where the infimum is taken on all pairs of Rd -valued random variables X and Y
whose law are μ and ν respectively. Notice that when λ is a finite measure on a
space X whose mass is not one, the expectation Eλ (f ) should be interpreted as the
unnormalized mean X f (x) dλ(x).
   This distance is also known as the earth-mover distance, and has been used in
vision [17] and image retrieval [18]. One of the interesting properties of the Wasser-
stein distance is the Kantorovich–Rubinstein duality theorem. Recall that a function
f : Rd → R is 1-Lipschitz if for every choice of x and y, |f (x) − f (y)| ⩽ x − y.

Theorem (Kantorovich–Rubinstein) If μ and ν are two probability measures on Rd ,
then
                                                    
                                                      
                     dW (μ, ν) = sup f dμ − f dν 
                                    
                                      f

where the supremum is taken on all 1-Lipschitz function in Rd .

   The Lipschitz function f in the theorem can be thought of as a way of probing the
measure μ. For example, if f is a tent function, e.g. f (y) = (1 − x − y)+ , then
  f dμ gives an information about the local density of μ near x. The Kantorovich–
Rubinstein theorem asserts that if two measures μ and ν are Wasserstein-close, then
one can control the probing error between μ and ν by Lipschitz functions.
   The following proposition reduces the stability result of the map K → μK,E with
respect to the Wasserstein distance to a stability result for the map K → pK |E .

Proposition 3.1 If E is a subset of Rd , and K and K two compact sets, then
                                         
                                                         
                   dW (μK,E , μK ,E ) ⩽ pK (x) − pK (x) dx.
                                          E
                                                                      Found Comput Math

Proof Let Z be a random variable whose law is Hd |E . Then, X = pK ◦ Z
and Y = pK ◦ Z have law μK,E and μK ,E respectively. Hence by definition,
dW (μK,E , μK ,E ) ⩽ E(d(pK ◦ Z, pK ◦ Z)), which is the desired bound. 

A L1 Stability Theorem for Projections From now on, if E is a subset of Rd , f
an integrable function on E, and g a continuous function on E, we define the two
following norms:
                          
                                                              
              f L1 (E) = f (x) dx and g∞,E = sup g(x).
                            E                                x∈E

The key result of this paper is the following upper bound for the L1 -norm
pK − pK L1 (E) , when K and K are two Hausdorff-close compact sets.

Theorem 3.2 (Projection Stability) Let E be an open set in Rd with rectifiable
boundary, and K and K be two compact subsets of Rd and RK = dK ∞,E . Then,
there is a constant C1 (d) such that
                                                          
   pK − pK L1 (E) ⩽ C1 (d) Hd (E) + diam(K)Hd−1 (∂E) × RK dH (K, K )

assuming dH (K, K ) ⩽ min(RK , diam(K), diam(K)2 /RK ).

   The question of whether projection maps are stable has already drawn attention in
the past. In particular, Federer proved the following result in [14].

Theorem Let R be a positive number, and Kn ⊆ Rd be a sequence of compact
sets whose reach is greater than R, which Hausdorff-converges to some compact
K ⊆ Rd with reach(K) > R. Then pKn converges to pK uniformly on K R as n grows
to infinity.

    A drawback of this theorem is that it does not say anything about the speed of
convergence. But more importantly, the very strong assumptions that all compact
sets in the sequence have their reach bounded from below makes it completely un-
usable in the setting of geometric inference: indeed, since the reach of a point cloud
is the minimum distance between any two of its points, if a sequence of point clouds
Cn converges to some nondiscrete compact set K (e.g. a segment), then necessarily
limn reach(Cn ) = 0. In fact, if K is the union of two distinct points x and y, and
Kn = {x + n1 (x − y), y}, pKn does not converge uniformly to pK near the medial
hyperplane of x and y. So one cannot hope for a generalization of the above theorem
to a uniform convergence result of pKn to pK on an arbitrary open set E.
    From the stability of the gradient of the distance function (see [6]) one can deduce
that the projections pK and pKn can differ dramatically only near the medial axis
of K. This makes it reasonable to expect a L1 convergence property of the projections,
i.e. if Kn converges to K, then
                               
                                                    
                            lim pKn (x) − pK (x) dx = 0.
                           n    E
Found Comput Math

Fig. 2 Optimality of the
stability theorem




Unfortunately, for a generic compact set, the medial axis M(K) is dense in Rd (see
[22] for a proof). In this case, every point in Rd is (arbitrarily) close to a point in
M(K), and the above remark is of little help. The actual proof of the Projection
Stability Theorem relies on a new theorem in convex analysis, and is postponed to
the next section.
   Let us now comment on the optimality of this Projection Stability Theorem.
First, the speed of convergence of μK ,E to μK,E cannot be (in general) faster
than O(dH (K, K )1/2 ). Indeed, if D is the closed unit disk in the plane, and P
is a regular polygon inscribed in D with sidelength , then dH (D, P ) ≃ 2 . Now
we let E be the disk of radius 1 + R. Then, a constant fraction of the mass of
E will be projected onto the vertices of P by the projection pP (lightly shaded
area in Fig. 2). Now, the cost of spreading out the mass concentrated on these
vertices to get a uniform measure on the circle is proportional to the distance be-
tween consecutive vertices, so dW (μD,E , μP ,E ) = (). Hence, by Proposition 3.1,
pD − pP L1 (E) = () = (dH (D, P )1/2 ). Note that this O(dH (K, K )1/2 ) behav-
ior does not come from the curvature of the disk, since one can also find an example
of a family of compacts S made of small circle arcs converging to the unit segment
S such that pS − pS L1 (E) = (dH (S, S )1/2 ) (see Fig. 2).
   The second remark concerning the optimality of the theorem is that the second
term of the bound involving Hd−1 (∂E) cannot√be avoided. Indeed, let us suppose
that a bound pK − pK L1 (E) ⩽ C(K)Hd (E) ε were true around K, where ε is
the Hausdorff distance between K and K . Now let K be the union of two parallel
hyperplanes at distance R intersected with a big sphere centered at a point x of their
medial hyperplane M. Let Eε be a ball of radius ε/2 tangent to M at x and Kε
be the translate by ε of K along the common normal of the hyperplanes such that
the ball Eε lies in the slab bounded by the medial hyperplanes of K and Kε . Then,
pK − pK L1 (Eε ) ≃ R × Hd (Eε ), which exceeds the assumed bound for a small
enough ε.

Proof of the Projection Stability Theorem The Projection Stability Theorem will
follow from a more general theorem on the L1 norm of the difference between the
gradients of two convex functions defined on some open set E with rectifiable bound-
ary. The connection between projections and convex analysis is that any projection
pK derives from a convex potential vK .

Lemma 3.3 The function vK : Rd → R defined by vK (x) = x2 − dK (x)2 is convex
with gradient ∇vK = 2pK almost everywhere.
                                                                      Found Comput Math

Proof By definition, vK (x) = supy∈K x2 − x − y2 = supy∈K vK,y (x) with
vK,y (x) = 2x|y − y2 . Hence vK is convex as a supremum of affine functions,
and is differentiable almost everywhere. Then, ∇vK (x) = 2dK (x)∇x dK − 2x. The
equality ∇dK (x) = (pK (x) − x)/dK (x), valid when x is not in the medial axis, con-
cludes the proof.                                                                 

   Hence if K, K are two compact subsets of Rd , we have
                                       1
                     pK − pK L1 (E) = ∇vK − ∇vK L1 (E) .
                                       2
Moreover, denoting RK = dK ∞,E , the two following properties for the functions
vK and vK can be deduced from a simple calculation.

Lemma 3.4 If dH (K, K ) ⩽ min(RK , diam(K)), then
                                                
         vK − vK ∞,E := sup dK (x)2 − dK (x)2  ⩽ 3dH (K, K )RK ,
                                x∈E
                                
           diam ∇vK (E) ∪ ∇vK (E) ⩽ 3 diam(K).

   Let us now state the stability result for gradients of convex functions.

Theorem 3.5 Let E be an open subset of Rd with rectifiable boundary, and f, g be
two locally convex functions on E such that diam(∇f (E) ∪ ∇g(E)) ⩽ k. Then,

        ∇f − ∇gL1 (E)
                                       1/2                1/2
          ⩽ C2 (n) × Hd (E) + k + f − g∞,E Hd−1 (∂E) f − g∞,E .

    We note that this result may be viewed as the converse of classical inequalities
(Poincaré inequalities) stating that if the gradients of two functions are close, then
the two functions are also (up to an additive constant) close. Such converse results
(reverse Poincaré inequalities) have been the subject of intense research in functional
analysis (e.g. [3, 4]), but in a rather different setting.
    The Projection Stability Theorem is easily deduced from Theorem 3.5 and Lem-
mas 3.3 and 3.4. We now turn to the proof of the 1-dimensional case of Theorem 3.5.
The general case will follow using an argument of integral geometry—i.e., we will
integrate the 1-dimensional inequality over the set of lines of Rd and use the Cauchy–
Crofton formulas (3.1) and (3.2) below to get the d-dimensional inequality.
    Cauchy–Crofton formulas give a way to compute the volume of a set E in terms of
the expectation of the length of E ∩  where  is a random line in Rd . More precisely,
if one denotes by Ld the set of oriented lines of Rd , then denoting by dLd the properly
normalized rigid motion invariant measure on Ld , we have
                                          
                                      1
                        H (E) =
                          d
                                                 length( ∩ E) dLd                 (3.1)
                                    ωd−1 ∈Ld

where ωd−1 is the (d − 1)-volume of the unit sphere in Rd . If S is a rectifiable
hypersurface of Rd —i.e., a countable union of patches of Lipschitz hypersurfaces,
Found Comput Math

Fig. 3 Proof of the
1-dimensional inequality




see [15]—then
                                                       
                                                 1
                               H   d−1
                                         (S) =                #( ∩ S) dLd         (3.2)
                                               2βd−1   ∈Ld

where βd−1 is the (d − 1)-volume of the unit ball in Rd−1 .

Proposition 3.6 If I is an interval, and ϕ : I → R and ψ : I → R are two convex
functions such that diam(ϕ (I ) ∪ ψ (I )) ⩽ k, then letting δ = ϕ − ψL∞ (I ) ,
                    
                                                             
                       |ϕ − ψ | ⩽ 8π length(I ) + k + δ 1/2 δ 1/2 .
                           I

Proof Since ϕ and ψ are convex, their derivatives are nondecreasing. Let V be the
closure of the set of points (x, y) in I × R such that y is in the segment [ϕ (x), ψ (x)]
(or [ψ (x), ϕ (x)] if ϕ (x) ⩾ ψ (x)). By the definition of V , I |ϕ − ψ | = H2 (V ).
    If D is a disk included in V and [x0 , x1 ] ⊂ I is the projection of D on the x-axis,
then the sign of the derivative of the difference κ = ϕ −ψ does not change on [x0 , x1 ].
Assuming w.l.o.g. that κ is nondecreasing on [x0 , x1 ], we have |κ(x0 ) − κ(x1 )| =
  x1
 x0 |κ | ⩾ H (D).
                2

    But since κ∞ = δ, the area of D cannot    be greater than 2δ. Thus, if p is any
point of V , for any δ > δ the disk B(p, 2δ /π ), whose area is 2δ , necessarily
intersects
       √
             the boundary ∂V (see Fig. 3). This proves that V is contained in the offset
(∂V )    2δ/π . It follows that
                                
                                                      √     
                                  |ϕ − ψ | ⩽ H2 (∂V ) 2δ/π .                        (3.3)
                                     I

   Now, ∂V can be written as the union of two xy-monotone curves Φ and Ψ joining
the lower left corner of V and the upper right corner of V so that (∂V )r ⊆ Φ r ∪ Ψ r .
   We now find a bound for H2 (Φ r ) (the same bound will of course apply to Ψ ).
Since the curve Φ is xy-monotone, we have length(Φ) ⩽ length(I ) + k. Thus, for
any r > 0 there exists a subset X ⊆ Φ of N = (length(I ) + k)/r points such that
Φ ⊆ X r , implying
                                                                  
              H2 Φ r ⩽ H2 X 2r ⩽ 4πr 2 N ⩽ 4πr length(I ) + k + r .              (3.4)
                                                                              Found Comput Math

                          √      √
Using (3.3) and (3.4), and 2δ/π ⩽ δ, one finally obtains
                                                           √ √
                          √      √            
         |ϕ − ψ | ⩽ H2 Φ 2δ/π ∪ Ψ 2δ/π ⩽ 8π length(I ) + k + δ δ.                            
        I

Proof of Theorem 3.5 The 1-dimensional case follows directly from Proposition 3.6:
in this case, E is a countable union of intervals on which f and g satisfy the hypoth-
esis of the proposition. Summing the inequalities gives the result with C2 (1) = 8π .
    We now turn to the general case. Given any L1 vector field X one has
                                           
                                 d                           
                    X dx =                         X(y)|u()  dy d
                  E            2ωd−2 ∈L y∈∩E
                                           d


where u() is a unit directing vector for  (see Lemma III.4 in [7] for a proof of
this formula). Letting X = ∇f − ∇g, f = f |∩E and g = g|∩E , one gets, with
D(d) = d/(2ωd−2 ),
                                        
                                                              
               ∇f − ∇g = D(d)                   ∇f − ∇g|u()  dy d
            E                             ∈Ld   y∈∩E
                                                
                                 = D(d)                  |f − g | dy d.
                                          ∈Ld   y∈∩E

   The functions f and g satisfy the hypothesis of the 1-dimensional case, so that
for each choice of , and with δ = f − gL∞ (E) ,
       
                                                                        
              |f − g | dy ⩽ 8πδ 1/2 × H1 (E ∩ ) + k + δ 1/2 H0 (∂E ∩ ) .
        y∈∩E

It follows by integration on Ld that
    
        ∇f − ∇g
    E
                                                                                   
                                                          
      ⩽ 8πD(d)δ   1/2
                        ×         H (E ∩ ) dL + k + δ 1/2
                                    1                d
                                                                         H (∂E ∩ ) dL .
                                                                          0             d
                             Ld                                     Ld

The formulas (3.1) and (3.2) show that the first integral in the second term is equal
(up to a constant) to the volume of E and the second one to the (d − 1)-measure of
∂E. This proves the theorem with C2 (d) = 8πD(d)(ωd−1 + 2βd−1 ).                   

3.1 Stability of the Pushforward of a Measure by a Projection

The boundary measures defined above are a special case of pushforward of a mea-
sure by a function. The pushforward of a measure μ on Rd by the projection pK is
another measure, denoted by pK# μ, concentrated on K and defined by the formula
pK# μ(B) = μ(p−1  K (B)).
   The stability results for the boundary measures K → μK,E can be generalized to
prove the stability of the map K → pK# μ where μ has a density u : Rd → R+ , which
Found Comput Math

means that μ(B) = B u(x) dx. We need the measure μ to be finite, which is the same
as asking that the function u belong to the space L1 (Rd ) of integrable functions.
   We also need the function u ∈ L1 (Rd ) to have bounded variation. We recall
the following basic facts of the theory of functions with bounded variation, taken
from [1]. If u is an integrable function on Rd , the total variation of u is
                                                                    
                                                      
                  var(u) = sup       u div ϕ; ϕ ∈ Cc1 Rd , ϕ∞ ⩽ 1 .
                                   Rd

   A function u ∈ L1 (Rd ) has bounded variation if var(u) < +∞. The set of func-
tions of bounded variation on Rd is denoted by BV(Rd ). We also mention that if u is
Lipschitz, then var(u) = ∇uL1 (Rd ) .

Theorem 3.7 Let μ be a measure with density u ∈ BV(Rd ) with respect to the
Lebesgue measure, and K be a compact subset of Rd . We suppose that the support of
u is contained in the offset K R . Then, if dH (K, K ) is small enough,
                                                                       
             dW (pK# μ, pK # μ) ⩽ C2 (n) uL1 (K R ) + diam(K) var(u)
                                       √
                                     × R dH (K, K )1/2 .

Proof We begin with the additional assumption that u has class C ∞ . The function u
can be written as an integral over t ∈ R of the characteristic functions of its superlevel
                                  ∞
sets Et = {u > t}, i.e. u(x) = 0 χEt (x) dt. Fubini’s theorem then ensures that for
any 1-Lipschitz function f defined on Rd with f ∞ ⩽ 1,
                                 
                   pK # μ(f ) =       f ◦ pK (x)u(x) dx
                                    Rd
                                    
                               =            f ◦ pK (x)χ{u⩾t} (x) dx dt.
                                    R Rd

   By Sard’s theorem, for almost any t, ∂Et = u−1 (t) is an (n − 1)-rectifiable
subset of Rd . Thus, for those t the Projection Stability Theorem implies, for ε =
dH (K, K ) ⩽ ε0 = min(R, diam(K), diam(K)2 /RK ),
  
                             
     f ◦ pK (x) − f ◦ pK (x) dx ⩽ pK − pK  1
                                                 L (Et )
   Et
                                                                                 √
                                        ⩽ C2 (n) Hd (Et ) + diam(K)Hn−1 (∂Et )       Rε.

Putting this inequality into the last equality gives
                                                                      
                                                                       √
  pK# μ(f ) − pK # μ(f ) ⩽ C2 (n)        H (Et ) + diam(K)H (∂Et ) dt
                                              d              n−1
                                                                          Rε.
                                           R

Using Fubini’s theorem again and the coarea formula, one finally gets that
                                                                   √
       pK# μ(f ) − pK # μ(f ) ⩽ C2 (n) u 1 R + diam(K) var(u) Rε.
                                            L (K )
                                                                                     Found Comput Math

From the Kantorovich–Rubinstein theorem, this yields the desired inequality on
dW (pK# μ(f ), pK # μ(f )), and concludes the proof of the theorem in the case of a
C ∞ function u. To get the general case, one has to approximate the bounded variation
function u by a sequence of C ∞ functions (un ) such that both u − un L1 (K R ) and
| var(u) − var(un )| converge to zero. This is always possible thanks to Theorem 3.9
in [1].                                                                            


4 Stability of Curvature Measures

The definition of Wasserstein distance assumes that both measures are positive and
have the same mass. While this is true for μK,E and μK ,E (whose mass is the vol-
ume of E), this is not the case anymore when considering μK,K r and μK ,K r whose
masses are respectively Hd (K r ) and Hd (K r ). We thus need to introduce another
distance on the space of (signed) measures.

Distance Between Two Boundary Measures The Kantorovich–Rubinstein theorem
makes it natural to introduce the bounded Lipschitz distance between two measures
μ and ν as follows:
                                                           
                                                             
                      dbL (μ, ν) = sup  f dμ − f dν 
                                          
                                           f ∈BL1 (Rd )


the supremum being taken on the space of 1-Lipschitz functions f on Rd such that
supRd |f | ⩽ 1. With this definition, one gets the following.

Proposition 4.1 If K, K are compact subsets of Rd ,
                               
                                                                  
     dbL (μK,K r , μK ,K r ) ⩽     pK (x) − pK (x) dx + Hd K r K r ,
                                        K r ∩K r

where K r K r is the symmetric difference between the offsets K r and K r .

Proof Let ϕ be a 1-Lipschitz function on Rd bounded by 1. Using the change-of-
variable formula one has
                                          
                                            
             ϕ(x) dμK,K r − ϕ(x) dμK ,K r 
                                            
                                                                    
                                                                      
               =          ϕ ◦ pK (x) dx −             ϕ ◦ pK (x) dx 
                       Kr                          Kr
                                                                     
                                                                                   
               ⩽                   ϕ ◦ pK (x) − ϕ ◦ pK (x) dx +                ϕ(x) dx.
                   K    r
                            ∩K r                                           KK

By the Lipschitz condition, ϕ ◦ pK (x) − ϕ ◦ pK (x) ⩽ |pK (x) − pK (x)|, thus giving
the desired inequality.                                                             
Found Comput Math

   The new term appearing in this proposition involves the volume of the symmetric
difference K r K r . In order to get a result similar to the Projection Stability Theo-
rem but for the map K → μK,K r , we need to study how fast this symmetric difference
vanishes as K converges to K. It is not hard to see that if dH (K, K ) is smaller than ε,
then K r K r is contained in K r+ε \ K r−ε . Assuming that dH (K, K ) < ε, using the
coarea formula (see [15]), we can bound the volume of this annulus around K as
follows:
                                           r+ε
                                   r                      
                        Hd K r K ⩽              Hd−1 ∂K s ds.
                                            r−ε
In the next paragraph we give a bound on the area of the boundary of the offset K r ,
which we will then use to obtain a stability result for boundary measures μK,K r and
curvature measures.

Area of Offset Boundaries The next proposition gives a bound for the measure of
the r-level set ∂K r of a compact set K ⊆ Rd depending only on its covering number
N (K, r). The covering number N (K, r) is defined as the minimal number of closed
balls of radius r needed to cover K and is a way to measure the complexity of K—
for instance, if K can be embedded in Rd , then N (K, r) = O(r −d ). Precisely, we
prove the following proposition, denoting by ωd−1 (r) the volume of the (d − 1)-
dimensional sphere of radius r in Rd :

Proposition 4.2 If K is a compact set in Rd , for every positive r, ∂K r is rectifiable
and
                               
                      Hd−1 ∂K r ⩽ N (∂K, r) × ωd−1 (2r).

   We first prove Proposition 4.2 in the special case of r-flowers. An r-flower F is the
boundary of the r-offset of a compact set contained in a ball B(x, r), i.e. F = ∂K r
where K ⊆ B(x, r). The difference from the general case is that if K ⊆ B(x, r),
then K r is star-shaped with respect to x (this will be established in the proof of
Lemma 4.3). Thus we can define a ray-shooting map sK : S d−1 → ∂K r , which
sends any v ∈ S d−1 to the intersection of the ray emanating from x with direction
v with ∂K r .

Lemma 4.3 If K is a compact set contained in a ball B(x, r), the ray-shooting map
sK defined above is 2r-Lipschitz, so that Hd−1 (∂K r ) ⩽ ωd−1 (2r).

Proof Since ∂K r = sK (B(0, 1)), assuming that sK is 2r-Lipschitz, we will indeed
have Hd−1 (K r ) ⩽ (2r)d−1 Hd−1 (B(0, 1)) = ωd−1 (2r). Let us now compute the Lip-
schitz constant of the ray-shooting map sK .
   If we let tK (v) be the distance between x and sK (v), we have tK (v) =
supe∈K te (v). Since tK is the supremum of all the te , in order to prove that sK is
2r-Lipschitz, we only need to prove that each se is 2r-Lipschitz. Without loss of
generality, we will suppose that e is at the origin, x ∈ B(0, r), and let s = se . Solving
the equation x + t (v)v = r with t ⩾ 0 gives
                                
                         t (v) = x|v2 + r 2 − x2 − x|v.
                                                                     Found Comput Math

   This gives the following expression for the derivative of s(v) = x + t (v)v:
                                   
                dv s(w) = s(v) − x w + dv t (w)v
                                                                  
                                            x|vx|w
                        = s(v) − x|v w +                  − x|w v
                                               s(v)|v
                                     s(v)|vw − x|wv
                        = s(v) − x|v                      .
                                             s(v)|v
    If w is orthogonal to x, then dv s(w) ⩽ s(v) − xw ⩽ 2rw and we are
done. We now suppose that w is contained in the plane spanned by x and v. Since w
is tangent to the sphere at v, it is also orthogonal to v. Hence, s(v) − x|w = 0, and
x|w = s(v)|w.
                                      2 s(v)|vw − s(v)|wv
                   dv s(w) = s(v) − x                         .
                                              s(v)|s(v) − x
If we suppose that both v and w are unit vectors, s(v)|vw − s(v)|wv is the ro-
tation of s(v) by an angle of π/4. By linearity we get s(v)|vw − s(v)|wv =
ws(v) (we still have v = 1). Now let us remark that
                    1       2      2       1        2
       s(v)|s(v) − x = x − s(v) + s(v) − x2 ⩾ x − s(v) .
                      2                            2
Using this we deduce the following:
                                                
          dv s(w) ⩽ s(v) − x 2 ws(v) = 2s(v)w ⩽ 2rw.
                                  2 x − s(v)
                                  1            2


We have just proved that for any w tangent to the sphere at v, dv s(w) ⩽ 2rw,
from which we can conclude that s is 2r-Lipschitz.                             

Proof of Proposition 4.2 By definition of the covering number, there exists a finite
family of points x1 , . . . , xn , with n = N (K, r), such that union of the open balls
B(xi ) covers ∂K. If one denotes by Kithe intersection of ∂K with B(xi , r), the
boundary ∂K r is contained in the union i ∂Kir . Hence its Hausdorff measure does
                   
not exceed the sum i Hd−1 (∂Kir ). Since, for each i, ∂Kir is a flower, one concludes
by applying the preceding lemma.                                                     

   From the discussion above we easily get the following.

Corollary 4.4 For any compact sets K, K ⊆ Rd , with dH (K, K ) ⩽ r/2,
                        r
              Hd K r K ⩽ 2N (K, r/2)ωd−1 (3r) × dH (K, K ).

Stability of Approximate Curvature Measures Combining the results of Proposi-
tion 4.1, Corollary 4.4, and the Projection Stability Theorem, one obtains the follow-
ing stability result for boundary measures μK,K r .
Found Comput Math

Theorem 4.5 If K and K are two compact sets of Rd ,
                                                                         
                                                                             dH (K, K )
        dbL (μK,K r , μK ,K r ) ⩽ C3 (d)N (K, r/2)r r + diam(K)
                                                         d
                                                                                  r
provided that dH (K, K ) ⩽ min(diam K, r/2, r 2 / diam K).

   To define the approximate curvature measures, let us fix a sequence (ri ) of d + 1
distinct numbers 0 < r0 < · · · < rd . For any compact set K and Borel subset B ⊂ K,
          (r)
we let [ΦK,i (B)]i be the solutions of the linear system

                                         
                                         d
                                                       (r)    d−j
            ∀i   s.t   0 ⩽ i ⩽ d,               ωd−j ΦK,j (B)ri     = μK,K ri (B).
                                         j =0

           (r)
We call ΦK,j the (r)-approximate curvature measure. Since this is a linear system,
                 (r)
the functions ΦK,i also are additive. Hence the (r)-approximate curvature measure
  (r)
ΦK,i defines a signed measure on Rd . We also note that if K has a reach greater
                                 (r)
than rd , then the measures ΦK,i coincide with Federer’s curvature measures of K,
as introduced in Sect. 2. From these remarks and from Theorem 4.5, we have the
following.

Corollary 4.6 For each compact set K whose reach is greater than rd , there exists a
constant C4 (K, (r), d) depending on K, (r) and d such that for any K ⊆ Rd close
enough to K,
                       (r)                     
                                i
                   dbL ΦK ,i , ΦK   ⩽ C4 K, (r), d dH (K, K )1/2 .

   This corollary gives a way to approximate the curvature measures of a compact
set K with positive reach from the (r)-approximate curvature measures of any point
cloud close to K.


5 Computing Boundary Measures

If C = {pi ; 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n} is a point cloud, that is, a finite set of points of Rd , then μC,C r
is a sum of weighted Dirac measures: letting VorC (pi ) denote the Voronoi cell of pi ,
we have
                                    n
                                                             
                         μC,C r =      Hd VorC (pi ) ∩ C r δpi .
                                       i=1
   Hence, computing boundary measures amounts to finding the volume of inter-
sections of Voronoi cells with balls. This method is practical in dimension 3, but
in higher dimensions it becomes prohibitive due to the exponential cost of Voronoi
diagram computations. We instead compute approximations of boundary measures
using a Monte Carlo method. Let us first recall some standard facts about these ap-
proximations.
                                                                       Found Comput Math

Approximation by Empirical Measures If μ is a probability measure on Rd , one
can define another measure as follows: let X1 , . . . , XN be a family of independent
                                                                              
random vectors in Rd whose law is μ, and let μN be the sum of Dirac N1 i δXi .
Convergence results of the empirical measure μN to μ are known as the uniform
law of large numbers. Using standard arguments based on Hoeffding’s inequality,
covering numbers of spaces of Lipschitz functions and the union bound, it can be
shown [7] that if μ supported in K ⊆ Rd , then the following estimate on the bounded-
Lipschitz distance between the empirical and the real measure holds:
                                                                        
            P dbL (μN , μ) ⩾ ε ⩽ 2 exp ln(16/ε)N (K, ε/16) − N ε 2 /2 .

   In particular, if μ is supported on a point cloud C, with #C = n, then
N (C, ε/16) ⩽ n. This shows that computing an ε-approximation of the measure
μ with high probability (e.g. 99%) can always be done with N = O(n ln(1/ε)/ε2 ).
However, if C is sampled near a k-dimensional object, then for ε in an appropri-
ate range we have N (C, ε/16) ⩽ const ε −k , in which case N is of the order of
− ln(ε)ε −k−2 .

Monte Carlo Approximation of Boundary Measures Let C = {p1 , . . . , pn } be a
point cloud. Applying the ideas of the previous paragraph to the probability measure
           μ r
βC,C r = HdC,C
             (C r )
                    , we get the approximation algorithm (Algorithm 1).
    To simulate the uniform measure on C r in step I, one cannot simply generate
points in a bounding box of C r , keeping only those that are actually in C r since the
probability of finding a point in C r might decrease exponentially with the ambient
dimension.
    Luckily, there is a simple algorithm to generate points according to this law which
relies on picking a random point xi in the cloud C and then a point X in B(xi , r)—
taking into account the overlap of the balls B(x, r) where x ∈ C (Algorithm 2). In-
stead of completely rejecting a point if it lies in k balls with probability 1 − 1/k, one
can instead modify Algorithm 1 to attribute a weight 1/k to the Dirac mass added at
this point. Step III requires an estimate of Hd (C r ). Using the same empirical mea-
sure convergence argument, one can prove that if TL is the total number of times the
loop of Algorithm 2 was run, and TN is the total number of points generated, then
TN/TL × nHd (B(0, r)) converges to Hd (C r ).
    In Fig. 4, we show the result of this computation for a point-cloud approximation
of a mechanical part. Each point xi of the point cloud C is represented by a sphere


Algorithm 1 Monte Carlo algorithm to approximate μC,C r
  Input: a point cloud C, a scalar r, a number N        
  Output: an approximation of μC,C r in the form N1         n(pi )δpi
  while k ⩽ N do
     [I.] Choose a random point X with probability distribution Hd 1(C r ) Hd |C r
     [II.] Find its closest point pi in the cloud C, add 1 to n(pi )
  end while
  [III.] Multiply each n(pi ) by Hd (C r ).
Found Comput Math

Algorithm 2 Simulating the uniform measure in C r
  Input: a point cloud C = {pi }, a scalar r
  Output: a random point in C r whose law is Hd |C r
  repeat
    Pick a random point pi in the point cloud C
    Pick a random point X in the ball B(pi , r)
    Count the number k of points pj ∈ C at distance at most r from X
    Pick a random integer d between 1 and k
  until d = 1
  return X.


Fig. 4 Boundary measure for a
sampled mechanical part




                                                         
whose radius is proportional to the convolved value j χ(xi − xj )μC,C r ({xj }),
where χ is a tent function of appropriate radius. As expected, the relevant features of
the shape are visually highlighted.


6 Discussion

In this article, we introduced the notion of boundary measure. We showed how to
compute these measures efficiently for point clouds using a simple Monte Carlo al-
gorithm. More importantly, we proved that they depend continuously on the compact
set. That is, the boundary measure of a point-cloud approximation of a compact set
K retains the geometric information contained in the boundary measure of K, which
is, as we know, very rich. We also obtain the first quantitative stability result for
Federer’s curvature measures, which shows their usefulness for geometric inference.
However, several questions are still to be investigated.
    On the algorithmic side, finding approximate nearest neighbors is usually much
cheaper than finding exact nearest neighbors. It is thus tempting to replace nearest
neighbor projections by approximate nearest neighbors in the definition of boundary
measures. From the perspective of inference, it would be interesting to know whether
the obtained measure still enjoys comparable stability properties.
                                                                                    Found Comput Math

    Also, we know that if K has reach greater than R, then μK,K r is polynomial on
[0, R]. Because of the stability property proved in this article, if C is a point cloud
approximating K, then μC,C r is almost polynomial on [0, R]. But is the converse
also true? If so, our approach would provide a test for knowing whether a point cloud
is close to a compact of positive reach.
    Finally, the boundary measures as defined here are sensitive to outliers: a single
outlier may get a significant fraction of the mass of the boundary measure. While
this may be seen as an interesting feature for outlier detection, it would be useful to
modify the general definition of boundary measures so as to make it also robust to
this kind of noise.

Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to C. Villani and F. Morgan for valuable discussions and
suggestions. This work was partly supported by the ANR Grant GeoTopAl JC05_41922.



References

 1. L. Ambrosio, N. Fusco, D. Pallara, Functions of Bounded Variation and Free Discontinuity Problems.
    Oxford Mathematical Monographs (Oxford University Press, London, 2000).
 2. N. Amenta, S. Choi, T.K. Dey, N. Leekha, A simple algorithm for homeomorphic surface reconstruc-
    tion, Int. J. Comput. Geom. Appl. 12(1–2), 125–141 (2002).
 3. S. Bobkov, C. Houdré, Converse Poincaré-type inequalities for convex functions, Stat. Probab. Lett.
    34, 37–42 (1997).
 4. S. Bobkov, C. Houdré, A converse Gaussian Poincaré-type inequality for convex functions, Stat.
    Probab. Lett. 44, 281–290 (1999).
 5. G. Carlsson, T. Ishkhanov, V. De Silva, A. Zomorodian, On the local behavior of spaces of natural
    images, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 76(1), 1–12 (2008).
 6. F. Chazal, D. Cohen-Steiner, A. Lieutier, A sampling theory for compacts in Euclidean space, in
    Proceedings of the 22th Annual Symposium on Computational Geometry (2006).
 7. F. Chazal, D. Cohen-Steiner, Q. Mérigot, Stability of boundary measures (2007). arXiv:0706.2153.
 8. F. Chazal, A. Lieutier, Stability and computation of topological invariants of solids in Rn , Discrete
    Comput. Geom. 37(4), 601–617 (2007).
 9. D. Cohen-Steiner, H. Edelsbrunner, J. Harer, Stability of persistence diagrams, Discrete Comput.
    Geom. 37, 103–120 (2007).
10. D. Cohen-Steiner, J. Morvan, Restricted Delaunay triangulations and normal cycle, in Proceedings of
    the Nineteenth Annual Symposium on Computational Geometry (2003), pp. 312–321.
11. V. de Silva, G. Carlsson, Topological estimation using witness complexes, in Proceedings of the First
    IEEE/Eurographics Symposium on Point-based Graphics (2004), pp. 157–166.
12. T. Dey, J. Giesen, S. Goswami, W. Zhao, Shape dimension and approximation from samples, Discrete
    Comput. Geom. 29(3), 419–434 (2003).
13. H. Edelsbrunner, The union of balls and its dual shape, Discrete Comput. Geom. 13, 415–440 (1995).
14. H. Federer, Curvature measures, Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 93(3), 418–491 (1959).
15. F. Morgan, Geometric Measure Theory: A Beginner’s Guide (Academic Press, San Diego, 1988).
16. P. Niyogi, S. Smale, S. Weinberger, Finding the homology of submanifolds with confidence from
    random samples, Discrete Comput. Geom. (2006).
17. S. Peleg, M. Werman, H. Rom, A unified approach to the change of resolution: space and gray-level,
    IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 11(7), 739–742 (1989).
18. Y. Rubner, C. Tomasi, L. Guibas, The earth mover’s distance as a metric for image retrieval, Int. J.
    Comput. Vis. 40(2), 99–121 (2000).
19. J. Steiner, Über parallele Flächen, in Monatsbericht die Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin
    (1840), pp. 114–118.
20. C. Villani, Topics in Optimal Transportation (American Mathematical Society, Providence, 2003).
21. H. Weyl, On the volume of tubes, Am. J. Math. 61(2), 461–472 (1939).
22. T. Zamfirescu, On the cut locus in Alexandrov spaces and applications to convex surfaces, Pac. J.
    Math. 217, 375–386 (2004).
