  In general, the map Ψ is equivariant with respect to the isometry group I(g). If
C(g) = I(g), where C(g) is the conformal automorphism group of g, then the moduli
space of solutions, up to diffeomorphism and scaling, is given by the space of orbits
Ψ−1 (0)/I(g).
Proof. The existence of the map Ψ follows from Lemma 2.13, together with a fixed-
point argument as in [RS05, Proposition 4.2.1]. The argument above identified the
zero set of Pg with the moduli space of solutions modulo diffeomorphism and scaling,
up to uniqueness of the gauge βg (θ̃) = 0 found in Lemma 2.10. This gauge is unique
up to the action of the conformal group, since the kernel of the linearization N0′ is the
space of conformal Killing fields. Under the assumption that C(g) = I(g), the gauge
is therefore unique up to the action of the isometry group. The same argument holds
for PgB in the case n = 4, τ = −1/3.                                                   
Remark 2.15. It might seem more natural to use the gauge δg θ̃ = 0 in Lemma 2.10,
instead of the gauge βg θ̃ = 0. With a suitable modification of the map Pg , this
approach indeed works, thus obviating the assumtion that C(g) = I(g) in the second
part of Corollary 2.14. However, it is substantially more efficient to do compuations in
the βg θ̃ = 0 gauge, so we prefer to work in this gauge. There is no loss of generality for
Einstein metrics, since for these it is true that C(g) = I(g), with the only exceptional
case being that of the round sphere.
                    3. Second variation at an Einstein metric
  We begin this section by expressing the second variation of the volume normalized
functional in terms of the un-normalized functional. In the latter part of the section,
we will compute the full second variation of the un-normalized functional. These will
then be combined later in Sections 3.3 and 3.4.
                                    RIGIDITY AND STABILITY                                       27

3.1. Normalized functional. As before, we let Fτ denote any quadratic curvature
functional, and F̃τ denote the associated volume normalized functional.
Lemma 3.1. If g is critical for F̃τ then
(3.1)
                                          2
