                                            HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING

                                                          GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE




arXiv:2301.06112v2 [math.GT] 17 Jan 2024
                                                    Abstract. We introduce a hyperbolic reﬂection group trick which builds
                                                    closed aspherical manifolds out of compact ones and preserves hyperbolicity,
                                                    residual ﬁniteness, and—for almost all primes p—Fp -homology growth above
                                                    the middle dimension. We use this trick, embedding theory and manifold
                                                    topology to construct Gromov hyperbolic 7-manifolds that do not virtually
                                                    ﬁber over a circle out of graph products of large ﬁnite groups.




                                                                               1. Introduction
                                              By the Chern–Gauss–Bonnet theorem, an even dimensional hyperbolic mani-
                                           fold always has non-zero Euler characteristic. One geometric consequence of this
                                           is that such manifolds cannot ﬁber over the circle. On the other hand, all odd-
                                           dimensional manifolds have vanishing Euler characteristic, so, at least in principle,
                                           odd-dimensional hyperbolic manifolds can ﬁber. A remarkable discovery of the
                                           last few decades is that the later possibility is actually realized in dimension three:
                                           All closed, hyperbolic 3-manifolds have a ﬁnite cover that ﬁbers over a circle [3].
                                           There has been some recent progress towards determining whether or not some
                                           analogue of this phenomenon persists in higher dimensions. In a geometric direc-
                                           tion, Italiano, Martelli, and Migliorini constructed the ﬁrst ﬁnite volume hyperbolic
                                           5-manifolds that ﬁber over a circle [41]. These examples are non-compact and no
                                           closed 5-dimensional hyperbolic manifolds are known to ﬁber, see however [34] for
                                           an example which is closed nonpositively curved with isolated ﬂats. In a more alge-
                                           braic direction, Kielak [51] and Fisher [31] showed that for a large class of groups,
                                           the existence of a virtual F-homological ﬁbering is controlled by vanishing of certain
                                           skew ﬁeld Betti numbers. For F “ Q these Betti numbers are the L2 -Betti num-
                                           bers, and for general ﬁelds they have an interpretation as a measure of F-homology
                                           growth of ﬁnite covers. But, there is a curious1 dearth of closed, odd dimensional
                                           examples that do not virtually ﬁber, even if one passes from the hyperbolic to the
                                           more ﬂexible Gromov hyperbolic setting. The goal of the present paper is to address
                                           this. We use Fp -homology growth (for odd p) to prove:
                                           Theorem A. There exists a closed, odd-dimensional, aspherical manifold M with
                                           word hyperbolic fundamental group that does not virtually fiber over a circle.
                                             It is generally diﬃcult to construct exotic, high dimensional, closed aspherical
                                           manifolds with word hyperbolic fundamental group and this paper is no exception;
                                           we can’t produce any examples above dimension 7. We have two (very similar)
                                           constructions of such M. The ﬁrst is conceptually simpler, but has the downside

                                              1Curious, because the ﬁber of a hypothetical ﬁbration would be a closed, aspherical manifold
                                           with inﬁnite Outpπ1 q and no Z2 -subgroups. There are no known examples of such manifolds (note
                                           that the ﬁbers in [33] have Z2 -subgroups).
                                                                                         1
2              GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


of not producing anything explicit (we don’t know if the non-ﬁbering example is
in dimension 5 or 7). The second uses a few more tools, but has the advantage of
producing explicit 7-dimensional examples.
   We will refer to closed, aspherical manifolds with word hyperbolic fundamental
groups as Gromov hyperbolic manifolds, and from now on will say such groups are
hyperbolic. In dimension three they are precisely the closed manifolds that can be
given a hyperbolic structure, while in higher dimensions they form a larger class
that includes all the locally CATp´1q manifolds. Whether every Gromov hyperbolic
manifold has a locally CATp´1q metric seems to be an interesting open question.
We do not know the answer for our examples.

Relation to previous non-fibering results. Higher rank, irreducible, locally
symmetric spaces do not virtually ﬁber over a circle because their fundamental
groups do not surject onto Z by the Margulis normal subgroup theorem. This gives
many nonpositively curved (but no negatively curved) examples of closed aspherical
manifolds that do not ﬁber (e.g. the 5-manifolds obtained as ﬁnite volume quotients
of SLp3, Rq{SOp3q).
   Another way to see that many of these groups do not surject onto Z is to observe
that they have Kazhdan’s Property (T). The fundamental groups of some even (but
not odd) dimensional, negatively curved, locally symmetric spaces also have this
property. Moreover, there are additional random constructions of hyperbolic groups
with Property (T) [74] and also less random ones [58], but we are not aware of any
that produce fundamental groups of odd dimensional, closed, aspherical manifolds.
   In a more combinatorial direction (more relevant for the present paper), in [7]
we constructed closed, locally CAT(0) n-manifolds M0 that do not virtually ﬁber
in all odd dimensions n ě 7. The fundamental groups of these manifolds are ﬁnite
index subgroups of right-angled Coxeter groups and the ﬁbering obstruction is fast
Fp -homology growth. The manifolds M0 are not Gromov hyperbolic because their
fundamental groups contain Z2 .
   Theorem A provides the ﬁrst examples of odd dimensional, Gromov hyperbolic
manifolds that do not virtually ﬁber. Moreover, we can arrange π1 pMq to be special
in Haglund and Wise’s sense [37, Section 3]. In particular, this implies π1 pMq is
residually ﬁnite, does not have Property (T), and in fact has ﬁnite index subgroups
with arbitrarily large ﬁrst Betti number.

Homology growth and virtual fibering. In the examples we produce for The-
orem A the mechanism obstructing virtual ﬁbering is, again, fast homology growth.
To keep track of it, ﬁx a ﬁeld F, look at the inﬁmum of normalized F-Betti numbers
of all ﬁnite covers of M1 Ñ M (normalized by the degree |M1 Ñ M| of the cover)
                                                     bk pM1 ; Fq
                      βkinf pM; Fq :“      inf
                                           1
                                          M ÑM,     |M1 Ñ M|
                                        |M1 ÑM|ă8

and note that virtually ﬁbering M over a circle would give covers M1 Ñ M of
arbitrarily large degree whose F-Betti numbers bk pM1 ; Fq are bounded by a uni-
form constant (the sum of the F-Betti numbers of the ﬁber), which would imply
βkinf pM; Fq “ 0. So, positivity of this number obstructs virtual ﬁbering.

Relation to L2 -Betti numbers. For a ﬁnite complex X with residually ﬁnite
fundamental group and coeﬃcient ﬁeld F “ Q, the numbers βkinf pX; Qq are closely
               HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                                 3

                                                                p2q
related to the analytically deﬁned L2 -Betti numbers bk pXq. In that situation, the
proof of Lück’s approximation theorem implies (see Theorem 2.4)
                                p2q               βkinf pX 1 ; Qq
                               bk pXq “ sup            1
                                                                  ,
                                           X 1 ÑX |X Ñ X|
where the supremum is taken over all ﬁnite covers.
Pinching homology growth. For other ﬁelds F, we replace Q by F on the right
hand side, take the resulting quantity
                                        ˆ                    ˙
                                                bk pX 2 ; Fq
                     β k pX; Fq :“ sup    inf 1    2
                                                               ,
                                  X 1 ÑX X ÑX |X Ñ X|
                                          2


where the sup is over ﬁnite covers X 1 Ñ X and the inf is over further ﬁnite covers
X 2 Ñ X 1 , and call it the lower F-homology growth. It follows directly from this
max-min deﬁnition that the quantity β is multiplicative in ﬁnite covers, and that
it obstructs virtual ﬁbering. One also has the multiplicative quantity β obtained
by interchanging the roles of inf and sup in the deﬁnition, which we call the upper
F-homology growth. For F “ Q it gives the same answer (by Theorem 2.4) but in
general we only know that β inf ď β ď β, although we are not aware of any examples
in which the second inequality is strict.
Question 1.1. Is there a finite complex X with β k pX; Fp q ‰ β k pX; Fp q for some
prime p?
Special fundamental groups. In [7] we used speciﬁc properties of right-angled
Coxeter groups to help compute Fp -homology growth for the manifolds M0 . The
fundamental groups of the manifolds M we produce for Theorem A are not com-
mensurable to right-angled Coxeter groups, but they are special, hence embed in
right-angled Artin groups, and this turns out to be good enough to estimate the
homology of covers of M. For such groups, the numbers β inf have another, more
algebraic, “skew ﬁeld” interpretation that is convenient for doing Mayer–Vietoris
computations and, in particular, shows that they are integers. Namely, the group
ring Fπ1 pMq embeds in a nice2 skew ﬁeld DFπ1 pMq , one can do all the Mayer–
Vietoris arguments for homology with coeﬃcients in that skew ﬁeld, and the Betti
numbers bk pM; DFπ1 pMq q obtained from this homology coincide with the inﬁmum
of the normalized F-Betti numbers. Moreover, these algebraically deﬁned skew
ﬁeld Betti numbers are multiplicative in ﬁnite covers, which implies for subgroups
of right-angled Artin groups that we don’t need to take the sup in the deﬁnition of
β, i.e.
                  β k pM; Fq “ βkinf pM; Fq “ bk pM; DFπ1 pMq q P Z.
   So, the quantity β can be thought of as a multiplicative extension of the skew
ﬁeld Betti number from this special setting to situations where (nice enough) skew
ﬁelds do not exist. Using skew ﬁelds to study L2 -Betti numbers (and vice-versa)
originated in work of Linnell [56] and has been recently developed by Henneke–
Kielak [39], Jaikin-Zapirain [43, 44], and others. Though we haven’t seen the above
equality before in the literature, we prove it by combining a number of previously
known results, see Section 3 for more details.
   2Obtained by picking a bi-invariant order on the group and taking the division closure of the
group ring in the Malcev–Neumann skew ﬁeld of formal power series with well-ordered support.
4              GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


Remark. In more general situations, the inequality βkinf pX; Fq ď β k pX; Fq is often
strict. For instance, a wedge sum X of two hyperbolic homology 3-spheres has
              p2q
β 1 pX; Qq “ b1 pXq “ 1 but b1 pX; Qq “ 0, and hence β1inf pX; Qq “ 0.
Homology growth without chains. Previous works on homology growth of a
space X usually consider descending chains of subgroups π1 pXq “ G ą G1 ą G2 ą
. . . and the homology of the corresponding covers Xi . Typically,
                                                              Ş additional assump-
tions are placed on the subgroups Gi , such as normality, i Gi “ 1, or rG : Gi s
being some prime power. It was surprising to us that β k pXq and β k pXq worked just
as well while avoiding many of the headaches that come with using chains; with
Fp -coeﬃcients it is generally unknown whether the normalized homology growth of
such a chain has a limit, or depends on the choice of chain, etc. Even if G is a sub-
group of a right-angled Artin group, the identiﬁcation βkinf pX; Fq “ bk pX; DFπ1 pXq q
has no analogue for residual chains of normal ﬁnite index subgroups, though some
approximation results are known, see e.g. [14, Theorem 4.3].

The only F-homological, virtual fibering obstructions in a special setting.
A special case of a result of Fisher [31], building on work of Kielak [51], shows—for
a ﬁnite aspherical complex X whose fundamental group embeds in a right-angled
Artin group—that if the lower F-homology growth (he uses the skew ﬁeld deﬁnition)
in dimensions ď k vanishes then X has a ﬁnite cover X 1 which maps to a circle
with F Pk pFq homotopy ﬁber. So, non-vanishing of the lower F-homology growth
is the only F-homological obstruction in dimensions ď k to virtual ﬁbering in this
setting. We observe that non-vanishing of the upper F-homology growth is also an
F-homological virtual ﬁbering obstruction and hence Fisher’s result leads to
Theorem B. If X is a finite, aspherical complex whose fundamental group embeds
in a right-angled Artin group, then β ďk pX; Fq “ 0 if and only if β ďk pX; Fq “ 0.
  This theorem may seem quite formal, but it is useful in practice because it relates
two numbers β and β that have very diﬀerent advantages.
     ‚ If the fundamental group embeds in a right-angled Artin group, then β k pX; Fp q
       are integers, and as a consequence of this integrality diﬀer from the L2 -
                         p2q
       Betti numbers bk pXq “ β k pX; Qq at only ﬁnitely many exceptional primes,
       while
     ‚ vanishing of β k pX; Fq controls homology of virtually all ﬁnite covers: it says
       that for any δ ą 0 there is a “δ-good” ﬁnite cover X 1 Ñ X such that all
                                                                                     2
                                                                               k pX ;Fq
       further ﬁnite covers X 2 Ñ X 1 Ñ X have normalized Betti number b|X        2 ÑX|

       bounded by δ.
Remark. It is tempting to wonder if some of these phenomena hold for more general
fundamental groups: Higher rank, irreducible locally symmetric spaces do not ﬁber.
Do they have fast Fp -homology growth (in either the β or the β sense) for some
prime p?
The Singer conjecture and the F-Singer property. For closed aspherical n-
manifolds M n , the Singer conjecture predicts that the L2 -Betti numbers bp2q pM q
vanish outside the middle (“ n{2) dimension, and in particular that all the L2 -Betti
numbers of a closed, odd-dimensional, aspherical manifold vanish. This conjecture
suggests that rational homology growth shouldn’t give virtual ﬁbering obstructions
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                          5


in odd dimensions. But, the situation is diﬀerent for Fp -homology growth. Let us
single out the following homology growth vanishing property for n-manifolds
      ‚ upper F-Singer property: β k pM n ; Fq “ 0 for k ą n{2,
and similarly deﬁne the lower F-Singer property using lower homology growth. For
closed manifolds these properties imply by Poincaré duality that upper (or lower)
homology growth is concentrated in the middle dimension. If M is a closed aspher-
ical manifold with special fundamental group then, by Theorem B and Poincaré
duality, the upper and lower properties are equivalent and in this situation we will
refer to both as the F-Singer property.
   In [7] we built—for every odd prime p—closed, locally CAT(0) manifolds with
special fundamental groups that do not satisfy the Fp -Singer property in all odd
dimensions ě 7 (and all even dimensions ě 14). Much of the mathematical content
of the present paper amounts to producing Gromov hyperbolic ones. Our main
result is
Theorem C.
  (1) For any odd prime p, there is a closed, aspherical, n-manifold Mn of di-
      mension either n “ 5 or n “ 7 with special hyperbolic fundamental group
      such that β k pM; Fp q ą 0 for some k.
  (2) For large primes, such 7-manifolds definitively exist.
   Proving it turned out to be more subtle (and interesting) than we initially ex-
pected, because applying strict hyperbolization procedures (e.g. the Charney–Davis
strict hyperbolization) directly to our previous examples kills the golden goose: the
homology cycles responsible for fast growth get hyperbolized in the process and, as
a result, instead of getting a linear number of homology cycles in covers one gets a
sublinear number of more complicated cycles. To get an idea of how hyperboliza-
tion can destroy L2 -Betti numbers, note that strict hyperbolization applied to a
2-dimensional cube complex (e.g. the complex 8 ˆ 8) amounts to connect-summing
each square with a higher genus surface. A Mayer–Vietoris argument shows that
this process has the same eﬀect on the second L2 -Betti number as removing the
squares, leaving a 1-dimensional complex with vanishing second L2 -Betti number.
There are a number of elements that go into our construction of M, which we now
describe. We shall see how ensuring that M is Gromov hyperbolic prevents us from
making examples in dimensions ą 7.

Graph products. In the construction, the starring role is played by graph prod-
ucts GL of groups modeled on a ﬂag complex L. For each vertex v of L, pick a
group Gv and deﬁne
        GL :“ ˚ Gv {xrg, g 1s “ 1 if g P Gv , g 1 P Gv1 and v is adjacent to v 1 y.
                v

   Graph products of Z{2’s are right-angled Coxeter groups WL , graph products of
Z’s are right-angled Artin groups AL , but what we use are graph products of Z{m’s
for large m. They virtually embed in the corresponding right-angled Artin group
AL , and can either be thought of as deformations of WL whose homology growth
can be estimated, or deformations of AL that have a chance of being hyperbolic.

Hyperbolicity. A graph product of ﬁnite groups GL acts properly, cocompactly
on a CAT(0) cubical complex of dimension dim L ` 1. If the triangulation of L has
6               GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


no empty squares, then this complex can be given a GL -invariant CATp´1q metric,
so in that case GL is CATp´1q and hence hyperbolic.
Homology. In [7] we computed the F-homology growth of right-angled Artin
groups. The computation given there works identically for β and β and shows
                         β k pAL ; Fq “ b̃k´1 pL; Fq “ β k pAL ; Fq,
where b̃ denotes the reduced Betti number of L. In particular, β and β agree for
right-angled Artin groups and diﬀer from the usual L2 -Betti number at ﬁnitely
many primes determined by the topology of the underlying complex L.
   A graph product GL of large Z{m’s has approximately the same homology growth
as the corresponding right-angled Artin group AL , i.e.
                                 β k pGL ; Fq „ β k pAL ; Fq,
where the error is on the order of |L|{m (Corollary 5.2.)
    Somewhat surprisingly, the argument in this paper is conceptually simpler; our
computation relies on cell counting, whereas in [7] we needed to compute some
homology. Of course, in this paper we don’t get (or need) an exact computation of
β k pGL ; Fq.

Embedding theory. One can construct non-compact aspherical n-manifolds that
have a speciﬁed fundamental group by embedding that group in a right-angled Cox-
eter group of the form WS n´1 , as the groups WS n´1 all act properly on (topological)
Rn .
   This method works well for graph products of ﬁnite groups GL because by com-
mensurability results of [46] they virtually embed in the right-angled Coxeter group
WOL , where OL is a more complicated ﬂag complex called the octahedralization of
L, obtained from L by doubling the set of vertices and replacing each k-simplex
v0 ˚ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˚ vk by 2k`1 k-simplices v0˘ ˚ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˚ vk˘ . With Davis, in [6] we determined, for
a d-dimensional (d ‰ 2) ﬂag complex L, that OL embeds as a full subcomplex of
some ﬂag triangulation of S 2d if and only if Hd pL; F2 q “ 0. This implies that WOL
is a subgroup of WS 2d . In summary, if d ‰ 2 and bd pL; F2 q “ 0, then GL virtually
embeds in some WS 2d .
Construction of a 7-manifold with boundary. We now exploit the fact that
embedding theory for OL only depends on F2 -homology of L while Fp -homology
growth of GL is sensitive to the prime p. The 3-dimensional Moore space L “
D3 Yp S 2 , (p odd) has a ﬂag no-square triangulation by [69], and for any such
triangulation it follows from what we have said that the graph product GL of large
Z{m’s
      ‚ is hyperbolic,
      ‚ has β 4 pGL ; Fp q ą 0,
      ‚ virtually embeds in some WS 6 , and hence
      ‚ has a ﬁnite index subgroup Γ that acts properly and freely on R7 .
The quotient manifold R7 {Γ has ﬁnite type but is not compact. What saves us is
that the construction of the manifold also produces, as a byproduct, a codimension
three spine. This codimension three lets us compactify a regular neighborhood of
this spine using a π-π version of Siebenmann’s thesis (Theorem 6.6.) The upshot is
a compact aspherical 7-manifold pN, BN q with hyperbolic fundamental group and
               HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                            7


Fp -homology growth in dimension four. It remains to produce a closed aspherical
7-manifold with these properties.
On dimensions. Why did we start with a 3-complex? On one hand, Nguyễn Phan
and the ﬁrst author recently constructed examples [8] showing that the assumption
d ‰ 2 in the embedding theory cannot, in general, be avoided: there are ﬂag 2-
complexes L with b2 pL; F2 q “ 0 whose octahedralizations do not PL embed in S 4 .
On the other hand, ﬂag no-square triangulations of arbitrary polyhedra are only
known to exist in dimensions at most three [69]. While there are constructions
[47, 66] of ﬂag no-square d-complexes L in all dimensions d, we do not know how
to arrange these to have bd pL; F2 q “ 0 and bd pL; Fp q ‰ 0. So, we only know how to
make the method work in one dimension!
Question 1.2. Are there flag no-square d-complexes L for d ą 3 which have
bd pL; F2 q “ 0 and bd pL; Fp q ‰ 0?
A hyperbolic reflection group trick. To obtain a closed manifold we do a com-
bination of the Davis reﬂection group trick and the Charney–Davis strict hyper-
bolization. This hyperbolic reﬂection group trick works in any dimension, and may
be of independent interest, because it preserves hyperbolicity, residual ﬁniteness and
other pleasant features. The input to this trick is a compact n-manifold pN, BN q
with a ﬂag triangulation B of the boundary BN , and a choice of Charney–Davis
hyperbolized n-cube CDn . The output is a closed manifold hPBN , which we will
sometimes simply denote by M, obtained as follows. First, build the right-angled
Coxeter group corresponding to the ﬂag triangulation B, and take the commutator
quotient of the corresponding Davis complex. This results in a ﬁnite cube com-
plex, which is a manifold except at ﬁnitely many singular points, which have links
isomorphic to B. Now replace the cubes of this cube complex by CDn , and then
replace small neighborhoods of the singular points by copies of N .
   We summarize some of the properties of the hyperbolic reﬂection group trick:
Theorem D. Given a compact n-manifold pN, BN q with a flag triangulation B
of the boundary, the hyperbolic reflection group trick produces a closed n-manifold
M “ hPBN satisfying:
    (1) N is a retract of M,
    (2) If N is aspherical then M is aspherical,
    (3) If N is F-aspherical3 then M is F-aspherical,
    (4) If π1 pN q is hyperbolic then π1 pMq is hyperbolic,
    (5) If π1 pN q is virtually special hyperbolic then π1 pMq is virtually special hy-
        perbolic,
    (6) If π1 pN q is residually finite then π1 pMq is residually finite.
   Note that for n ą 5 any ﬂag triangulation of BN always has empty squares, so
the usual reﬂection group trick never produces a Gromov hyperbolic manifold.
   The ﬁrst part of Theorem C follows by applying the hyperbolic reﬂection group
trick to our seed manifold N 7 with hyperbolic fundamental group and β 4 pN ; Fp q ‰
0. The resulting manifold M can be cut along walls down to Charney–Davis pieces
and copies of N . The walls have virtually special fundamental groups which lets
us relate their homology growth in all ﬁnite covers to homology growth in the re-
stricted class of ﬁnite covers induced from M. This lets us do a Mayer–Vietoris type
   3A space is F-aspherical if its universal cover has the same F-homology as a point.
8               GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


argument and show that either M has non-vanishing β or a lower odd-dimensional
closed, locally CATp´1q manifold appearing as an intersection of walls in the con-
struction has non-vanishing β (and hence β by Theorem B). In either case, we get
a non-ﬁbering example.
   For the second part of Theorem C we need better control on homology growth of
the walls. We can achieve it by restricting our triangulation B to be a barycentric
subdivision of a triangulation of the boundary. This lets us arrange so that our
walls are themselves Charney–Davis hyperbolizations from a ﬁnite set of cubical
complexes that depends only on the dimension n. Then choosing an appropriate
CDn and applying recent work of Ontaneda shows that these walls admit Rie-
mannian metrics of suﬃciently pinched negative curvature, which by a result of
Donnelly–Xavier implies that L2 -Betti numbers of the walls vanish outside of the
two middle dimensions. Since the fundamental groups of these walls are virtu-
ally special, their β diﬀers from bp2q at only ﬁnitely many primes, and the cutting
argument proves the following theorem.
Theorem E. For each dimension n there is a choice of Charney–Davis piece CDn
and a corresponding finite collection of exceptional primes Sn , such that for any
compact n-manifold with boundary pN, BN q and any triangulation B which is a
barycentric subdivision of a triangulation of the boundary, the result of the hyperbolic
reflection group trick M “ hPBN satisfies the following inequalities for k ą n{2:
         p2q         p2q
    (1) bk pN q ď bk pMq,
    (2) β k pN ; Qq ď β k pM; Qq and β k pN ; Qq ď β k pM; Qq,
    (3) β k pN ; Fp q ď β k pM; Fp q and β k pN ; Fp q ď β k pM; Fp q for p R Sn .
  The second part of Theorem C follows from Theorem E applied to our seed
manifold N 7 .
Remark. When the fundamental group of the input π1 pN q is virtually special hyper-
bolic, then the fundamental group of the output π1 pMq is, as well, so we have access
to the skew ﬁeld DFπ1 pMq . Then, the entire cutting argument can be carried out
using this ambient skew ﬁeld (and its sub-skew ﬁelds corresponding to subgroups
of π1 pMq) and leads to an alternate proof of the ﬁrst inequality in Theorem E(3).
   As explained in [63], the (usual) reﬂection group trick implies that the Singer con-
jecture is equivalent to the statement that L2 -Betti numbers of a compact aspherical
manifold, possibly with boundary, vanish above the middle dimension. The hyper-
bolic reﬂection group trick recovers this and also shows that the Singer conjecture
for Gromov hyperbolic manifolds is equivalent to the statement that L2 -Betti num-
bers of compact aspherical manifolds with hyperbolic fundamental groups vanish
above the middle dimension.
Rationally aspherical manifolds. When L is a ﬂag triangulation of the 3-sphere
                                                     p2q
the graph product of large ﬁnite groups GS 3 has b4 pGS 3 q ą 0. In this case, the van
Kampen embedding theory method does not produce a 7-dimensional thickening
since b3 pS 3 ; F2 q ‰ 0, and we suspect that no such thickening exists. However, since
ﬁnite index torsion free subgroups Γ of GS 3 are duality groups [21, 24], we can use
the rational homotopy method from [5] to at least produce a rational thickening, i.e.
a rationally aspherical, compact 7-manifold with boundary pN, BN q, non-vanishing
 p2q
b4 and fundamental group Γ.
             HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                       9


   Moreover, if we start with a ﬂag no-square triangulation of S 3 (which do exist)
then the resulting group will be hyperbolic. Feeding this seed manifold N 7 into the
hyperbolic reﬂection group trick (with barycentrically subdivided boundary) gives

Theorem F. There is a closed, rationally aspherical 7-manifold M with special
                                  p2q
hyperbolic fundamental group and b4 pMq ‰ 0.

  Theorems C and F are quite diﬀerent both in the input used to obtain the ex-
amples and in their conclusions. The ﬁrst produces genuinely aspherical manifolds,
while the second produces examples in which the actual L2 -Betti numbers are not
concentrated in the middle dimension. Nonetheless, forgetting some of the infor-
mation they provide, we can put them in a single context. We have obtained for
F “ Q or Fp for odd primes p an example of a closed, F-aspherical manifold that
does not satisfy the F-Singer property. The remaining case is p “ 2.

Question 1.3. Does every F2 -aspherical manifold with residually finite fundamen-
tal group satisfy the (upper or lower) F2 -Singer property?

Acknowledgements. We thank the referee for a very detailed report and useful
comments which improved the paper, in particular they found a gap in our argu-
ments in Section 10 which has now been ﬁxed. We thank Andrei Jaikin-Zapirain
for answering multiple questions of ours concerning the skew ﬁeld approach to ho-
mological growth. Most of Section 3 came from trying to understand his answers.
The ﬁrst author thanks Tâm Nguyễn Phan for explaining van Kampen’s approach
to embedding theory and asking for an interpretation of embedding theory for oc-
tahedralizations in terms of it, which lead to Appendix III. We thank Sam Fisher
and Igor Belegradek for helpful comments on an earlier draft, and Andrei Jaikin-
Zapirain and Clara Löh for providing useful references. The ﬁrst and second authors
thank the Max Planck Institut für Mathematik for its support and excellent working
conditions. The third author was supported by the NSF grant DMS-2203325.



                                    Contents
  1. Introduction                                                                 1
  2. Upper and lower homology growth                                             10
  3. β inf via skew ﬁelds                                                        15
  4. Applications of the skew ﬁeld theory                                        21
  5. Graph products                                                              23
  6. Thickenings                                                                 26
  7. A hyperbolic reﬂection group trick                                          29
  8. Virtual specialness of π1 pMq                                               33
  9. Mayer–Vietoris arguments                                                    39
  10. Inductive structure of F-Singer                                            44
  11. Hyperbolic reﬂection group trick via barycentric subdivisions              48
  Appendix I. Rational homology growth and L2 , qualitatively                    50
  Appendix II. Residual ﬁniteness                                                51
  Appendix III. Embedding Octahedralizations                                     56
  References                                                                     61
10                 GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


Plan of the paper. Section 2 assembles some basic facts on homology growth.
Section 3 sets up the skew ﬁeld theory we need and Section 4 gives consequences
of this theory for homology growth and proves Theorem B. We estimate homology
growth of graph products in Section 5, thicken their classifying spaces to manifolds
in Section 6, construct closed aspherical manifolds via a hyperbolic reﬂection group
trick in Section 7 (proving Theorem D(1)–(4)), and show the results have virtually
special fundamental groups (Theorem D(5)) in Section 8. In Section 9, we derive the
Mayer–Vietoris inequalities needed for our induction arguments. Section 10 carries
out the basic inductive cutting argument and proves Theorem A and Theorem
C(1). Section 11 deals with the barycentric version of the hyperbolic reﬂection
group trick, proves Theorem E and uses it to establish Theorems C(2) and F. The
appendices discuss residual ﬁniteness of the hyperbolic (and the usual) reﬂection
group trick (proving Theorem D(6)), the relation between L2 -Betti numbers and
rational homology growth, and the embedding theory for octahedralizations.

                       2. Upper and lower homology growth
   Our ﬁrst goal is to understand the normalized Betti numbers of ﬁnite covers of a
complex X and how they vary as we pass to further covers. Somewhat surprisingly,
a number of basic but useful properties of this can be established by thinking of the
normalized Betti numbers as a function on the partially ordered4 set of all ﬁnite
covers, looking at upper and lower limits over this set, and using the fact that any
two ﬁnite covers have a further ﬁnite cover lying above both of them. In this section
we record the basic properties of such limits.

Limits over directed posets. Let pC, ăq be a partially ordered set. Suppose it
is directed (for any x, y P C there exists z P C such that x ă z and y ă z). A
subset D is cofinal if for any x P C there exists y P D such that x ď y. We want to
deﬁne various notions of limits of bounded real-valued functions on C. The basic
building blocks are taking inf or sup over a subset. There are two basic observations:
smaller subsets produce smaller sup and if the function is decreasing then inf can
be computed over any coﬁnal subset.
   Applying sup to tails (subsets of the form Cěx “ ty P C | y ě xu) deﬁnes an
operation on bounded functions f ÞÑ f sup :
                                         f sup pxq “ sup f.
                                                     Cěx

This converts any function to a decreasing one.
  Deﬁne f inf :“ ´p´f qsup . The following is immediate from the observations:
Lemma 2.1. f :“ pf sup qinf and f :“ pf inf qsup are constant functions.

   We will call f and f the upper and lower limits of f .
   We collect in the following lemma all the properties of upper and lower limits that
we need. They will be primarily used in obtaining the Mayer–Vietoris inequalities
in Section 9.
Lemma 2.2. Let f, g be bounded functions.
  (1) If f ď g, then f ď g and f ď g.

     4The partial order on covers of X is deﬁned by X 2 ą X 1 whenever X 2 is a cover of X 1 .
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                        11


   (2) (Almost additivity)
                      f ` g ď f ` g ď f ` g ď f ` g ď f ` g.
   (3) (Restriction) Let D be a cofinal subset of C. Then
                                 f ď f |D ď f |D ď f .
   (4) Let T be a tail of C. Then
                                 f “ f |T ď f |T “ f .

Proof. (1) is immediate. The last inequality in (2) follows from general subadditivity
of sup and additivity of inf for decreasing functions. Using f “ ´p´f q the following
trick then proves the third inequality in (2):
            f ` g “ f ` g ´ f ´ p´f q ď f ` g ` p´f q ´ p´f q “ f ` g.

Note that setting g “ 0 in this inequality gives f ď f , which justiﬁes the upper and
lower notation and proves the middle inequalities in (3) and (4).
   Since for a subset D of C, Děx “ Cěx X D, the basic observations give the last
inequality in (3). If T is itself a tail of C, then its tails are tails of C, hence
                                  pf |T qsup “ f sup |T ,
and we obtain the last equality in (4). The remaining (in)equalities are obtained
from these by ﬂipping signs.                                                   

Normalized Betti numbers as a function on a set of covers. For a complex
X, let CX denote the poset of ﬁnite covers of X. The normalized k-th F-Betti
numbers of such covers deﬁne a function on this poset, which we will denote by
βk pX; Fq, i.e. if X 1 Ñ X is a ﬁnite cover, then
                                                  bk pX 1 ; Fq
                             βk pX; FqpX 1 q :“                .
                                                  |X 1 Ñ X|
For much of this section, k and F will be unimportant, and then we will omit one
(or both) of them from the notation. The function βk pX; Fq is bounded by the
number of k-cells in X.
   The upper and lower F-homology growth, β k pX; Fq and β k pX; Fq are the upper
and lower limits over CX of this function, more explicitly:
                                        ˆ                      ˙
                                                  bk pX 2 ; Fq
                     β k pX; Fq :“ inf     sup                   ,
                                  X 1 ÑX X 2 ÑX 1 |X 2 Ñ X|
                                        ˆ                      ˙
                                                  bk pX 2 ; Fq
                     β k pX; Fq :“ sup     inf       2
                                                                 .
                                  X 1 ÑX X ÑX |X Ñ X|
                                           2    1



More generally, given a map h : X Ñ Y , and a ﬁnite cover π : Y 1 Ñ Y , the pullback
                    h˚ pY 1 q “ tpx, y 1 q : hpxq “ πpy 1 qu Ă X ˆ Y 1
is a ﬁnite cover of X of the same degree. We deﬁne the restricted homology growths
        Y
of X, β k pX; Fq and β Yk pX; Fq, by taking the above limits over the subset of covers
                                                  X
pulled back from Y . Note that for Y “ X, β pXq “ βpXq and β X pXq “ βpXq.
12                 GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


Rational homology growth and δ-good covers. We next describe a δ-pinching
theorem for normalized rational Betti numbers. It is a consequence of the proof
of Lück’s approximation theorem in [59] and can be thought of as a quantitative
variant of that theorem. Other quantitative versions of Lück approximation also
appear in [19] and [57].
   We need the following basic linear algebraic lemma.
Lemma 2.3 ([59, Theorem 3.4(1)]). Suppose ∆ is an N ˆ N matrix with integer
entries. Let Nǫ be the number of eigenvalues λ with |λ| P p0, ǫs, counted with
multiplicity. If ǫ ă 1 then
                               Nǫ     log|∆|
                                  ď
                               N     logpǫ´1 q
                                                                      b
Proof. Look at the
ś                   ś characteristic polynomial detpt ´ ∆q “ t qptq where qptq “
  0ăµi ďǫ pt ´ µi q  ǫăµi ď|∆| pt ´ µi q. Since ∆ has integer entries, the number qp0q is
a non-zero integer, hence
                                   1 ď |qp0q| ď ǫNǫ |∆|N .
Rearranging to pǫ´1 qNǫ ď |∆|N and taking logs gives Nǫ logpǫ´1 q ď N log|∆|. 
Theorem 2.4 (δ-pinching Q-homology growth). Let X be a finite complex. Given
δ ą 0 there is a finite cover Xδ such that the function βk pX; Qq is δ-pinched above
Xδ . More explicitly, if X 1 and X 2 are finite covers of Xδ then
                                   bk pX 1 ; Qq   bk pX 2 ; Qq
                                                ´              ď δ.
                                   |X Ñ X| |X 2 Ñ X|
                                       1

Proof. Let N be the number of k-cells of X. There is a ﬁnite constant D such that
the norm of the combinatorial Laplacian ∆1 acting on Ck pX 1 ; Qq of ﬁnite covers
of X is uniformly bounded by D (see [59, Lemma 2.5]) independent of the cover.
Choose 0 ă ǫ ă 1 satisfying
                                            log D
                       ǫN ă δ{2,      ǫ`            ă δ{N.
                                          logpǫ´1 q
Next choose r so that polynomial f pxq “ p1 ´ x{Dqr satisﬁes
                                             f pǫq ă ǫ.
Then, since f is monotone decreasing on r0, Ds,
                                   χ0 ď f ď χr0,ǫs ` ǫ on r0, Ds.
                               1
So, for any ﬁnite cover X Ñ X we have
     bk pX 1 ; Qq “ tr χ0 p∆1 q ď tr f p∆1 q ď trpχr0,ǫs ` ǫqp∆1 q “ bk pX 1 ; Qq ` Nǫ1 ` ǫN 1 ,
where N 1 is the number of k-cells of X 1 , and Nǫ1 is the number of eigenvalues in the
interval p0, ǫs of the Laplacian ∆1 acting on Ck pX 1 ; Qq. Since this combinatorial
Laplacian has integer entries, Lemma 2.3 implies
                                           log D
                                 Nǫ1 ď            N 1.
                                        logpǫ´1 q
Hence,
                 bk pX 1 ; Qq ď trpf p∆1 qq ď bk pX 1 ; Qq ` δ|X 1 Ñ X|.
Since f is a polynomial, there is a radius R such that the support of f p∆1 qe is in
the R-neighborhood of e for each cell e in X 1 .
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                        13


   Let X̂ Ñ X denote the universal residually ﬁnite cover and choose its ﬁnite
quotient Xδ , so that X̂ Ñ Xδ is injective on R-balls. Then any ﬁnite cover X 1 Ñ Xδ
is also injective on R-balls, hence
                          tr f p∆1 q “ trpf p∆δ qq|X 1 Ñ Xδ |.
Combining this with the above inequality shows”       that for any suchı cover X 1 the
                                                trpf p∆δ qq       p∆δ qq
normalized Betti numbers lie in the δ-interval |Xδ ÑX| ´ δ, trpf
                                                               |Xδ ÑX| , which proves
the claim.                                                                          
Corollary 2.5. For any finite complex X we have β ˚ pX; Qq “ β ˚ pX; Qq.

   If we ﬁx lifts ê in X̂ of k-cells
                                 ř e in X, then the injectivity on R-balls implies
that trpf p∆δ qq{|Xδ Ñ X| “ ePX pkq xf p ˆ∆qê, êy. As we vary the polynomial f ,
letting r Ñ 8, the quantity on the right of this equation converges to the von
Neumann dimension of the space of L2 -harmonic k-cycles on X̂ (see [59, Lemma
2.7]). Therefore the k-th rational homology growth can be identiﬁed with the von
Neumann dimension of this space. In particular, if π1 pXq is residually ﬁnite, then
X̂ is the universal cover, and we have
Corollary 2.6. For any finite complex X with residually finite fundamental group
we have
                                    p2q
                      β ˚ pX; Qq “ b˚ pXq “ β ˚ pX; Qq.

   For other coeﬃcients, we only have the inequality β ˚ pX; Fq ď β ˚ pX; Fq. It
follows directly from the deﬁnitions that the interval rβpX; Fq, βpX; Fqs has the
following interpretation: It is the smallest closed interval ra, bs such that for every
δ ą 0 there is a ﬁnite cover X 1 Ñ X such that for any further ﬁnite cover X 2 Ñ X 1
the normalized Betti numbers bpX 2 ; Fq{|X 2 Ñ X| lie in the interval ra ´ δ, b ` δs.

Connectedness. If X is disconnected, then its homology growth is the sum of the
homology growth of its components, as the following lemma shows.
Lemma 2.7. If X “ Y > Z, then
                               βpXq “ βpY q ` βpZq,

                               βpXq “ βpY q ` βpZq.
Proof. Clearly, the normalized Betti numbers of a ﬁnite cover of X is the sum of
the normalized Betti numbers of its restrictions to Y and Z. The issue is that in
general ﬁnite covers Y 1 Ñ Y and Z 1 Ñ Z do not combine to a cover of X unless they
have same degree, as our deﬁnition requires the degree to be constant. However,
we can equalize degrees by replacing Y 1 with |Z 1 Ñ Z| disjoint copies of Y 1 and
replacing Z 1 with |Y 1 Ñ Y | disjoint copies of Z 1 . This replacement does not change
the normalized Betti numbers, and the Lemma follows.                                 
   It is sometimes useful to keep in mind that we can compute homology growth of
a connected ﬁnite complex either using all covers, or just the connected ones. We
record this observation here as a lemma.
Lemma 2.8. For a connected finite complex X, the upper and lower homology
growth can be computed using connected covers.
14             GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


Proof. We give the proof for upper homology growth. Suppose X is a connected
complex, let X 1 Ñ X be a ﬁnite cover and denote by Xi1 its components. Then the
normalized Betti numbers of this cover are a convex combination
                                    ÿ |X 1 Ñ X|
                       βpXqpX 1 q “      i
                                                 βpXqpXi1 q
                                       |X 1 Ñ X|
of the normalized Betti numbers of the components. Since the coeﬃcients sum
to one, we conclude that βpXqpX 1 q ď βpXqpXi1 q for some i. So βpXqsup can be
computed over connected covers of X. Since βpXqsup is decreasing, its inf can be
computed over any coﬁnal subset. In particular, it can be computed over covers
that have identical components. Clearly, the answer of this computation is the
same as that for any of the components. Therefore βpXq of a connected complex
can be computed using only connected covers.                                  
Remark. The regular covers of X form a coﬁnal subset of CX , so Lemma 2.2(3)
provides bounds for homology growth in terms of the limits over regular covers.
We don’t know whether regular covers give an exact computation.
Finiteness. Since connected covers correspond to subgroups of the fundamental
group, we can relax ﬁniteness assumptions on X. Recall that a connected complex
                                                                      r Fq is Fπ1 X-
X is of type F Pn pFq if the chain complex of the universal cover C˚ pX;
chain homotopy equivalent to a complex P˚ of free Fπ1 X-modules which have
ﬁnite rank in degrees ď n. The following lemma shows that homology growth is
well deﬁned and ﬁnite in degrees ď n for such complexes.
Lemma 2.9. Let X be a connected complex so that the chain complex of the uni-
                  r Fq is Fπ1 X-chain homotopy equivalent to a complex P˚ of Fπ1 X
versal cover C˚ pX;
modules, where Pk is a free module of finite rank. Then the normalized Betti func-
tion βk pX; Fq is bounded:
                               βk pX; Fq ď rkFπ1 X Pk .
Proof. By the proof of the previous Lemma it is enough to check the inequality for
connected covers. Denote G :“ π1 X. Let X 1 Ñ X be a ﬁnite connected cover, and
let G1 ă G be the corresponding subgroup. Then we have
                   dimF Hk pX; FrG{G1 sq   dimF Hk pP˚ bFG FrG{G1 sq
 βk pX; FqpX 1 q “              1
                                         “                           ď rkFG pPk q.
                         rG : G s                   rG : G1 s
                                                                                 
Multiplicativity. If X 1 Ñ X is a ﬁnite cover, then CX 1 is naturally identiﬁed with
the tail pCX qěX 1 of CX , and on this tail we have βpXq|X 1 Ñ X| “ βpX 1 q. Therefore,
since by Lemma 2.2(4) the limits can be computed over tails, the homology growth
is multiplicative in covers of X:
                              βpX 1 q “ βpXq|X 1 Ñ X|,
                              βpX 1 q “ βpXq|X 1 Ñ X|.
Homology growth as a fibering obstruction. Multiplicativity implies a variant
of Lück’s mapping torus theorem [60] for homology growth.
Theorem 2.10 (F-homology mapping torus theorem for β). Let X be a complex
of type F Pn pFq, f : X Ñ X a self-homotopy equivalence and Tf its mapping torus.
Then for k ď n
                                   β k pTf ; Fq “ 0.
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                       15


Proof. We can assume that f is a cellular map. Let K “ π1 pXq and let G “
π1 pTf q “ K ¸ Z. The assumption means that the chain complex C :“ C˚ p r    X; Fq
is FK-chain homotopy equivalent to a complex of free FK-modules P which have
ﬁnite rank in degrees ď n. Let h : C Ñ P and l : P Ñ C be the chain homotopy
equivalence and its inverse. Consider the map g “ f m for some positive integer m.
The map g induces a chain map which we will also call g : C Ñ C.
   Let ĝ “ hf l : P Ñ P . The algebraic mapping telescope Trĝ of ĝ is FG-chain
homotopy equivalent to C˚ pTrg ; Fq. Thus, by Lemma 2.9

                     βk pTg ; Fq ď rkFG pTrĝ qk “ rkFK pPk ‘ Pk´1 q.
  The mapping torus Tg is homotopy equivalent to a degree m cover T 1 Ñ Tf , so
by multiplicativity
                    mβ k pTf ; Fq “ β k pTg ; Fq ď rkFK pPk ‘ Pk´1 q.
Since m can be picked arbitrarily large, we are done.                              


                              3. β inf via skew fields
   In this section we will give a skew ﬁeld description of β inf for complexes with
residually torsion-free nilpotent fundamental group. The proof goes by ﬁrst approx-
imating the residually torsion-free nilpotent group by torsion-free nilpotent groups,
and then approximating those by ﬁnite groups. Since groups are central to this ar-
gument, we will use equivariant notation to highlight the role of the groups involved,
rather than relegating it to a subscript in a coeﬃcient module.

Skew field Betti numbers. Let G be a group, let Y be a free cocompact G-CW
complex, and suppose we have a homomorphism φ : ZG Ñ D to a skew ﬁeld. The
homomorphism makes D into a ZG-bimodule, so we can take equivariant homology
of Y with coeﬃcients in D
                          H˚G pY ; Dq “ H˚ pD bZG C˚ pY qq,
and deﬁne the equivariant Betti numbers with coefficients in D of Y by taking its
dimension over D:
                            bG                 G
                             ˚ pY ; Dq “ dimD H˚ pY ; Dq.

More explicitly,
                                   piq
                                          `                         ˘
                   bG
                    i pY ; Dq “ |Y     | ´ rkD φpBi q ` rkD φpBi`1 q ,

where φpBi q denotes the image of the matrix of the diﬀerential in D and |Y piq | is
the number of G-orbits of i-cells in Y .

Remark. When Y is the universal cover of a connected ﬁnite complex Y {G with
fundamental group G, then this deﬁnition coincides with the usual (unequivariant)
homology of Y {G with local coeﬃcients in the ZG-module D,

                              H˚G pY ; Dq “ H˚ pY {G; Dq.
On the level of skew ﬁeld Betti numbers, bG
                                          ˚ pY ; Dq “ b˚ pY {G; Dq.
16             GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


Local homomorphisms. A nontrivial homomorphism between skew ﬁelds is nec-
essarily injective, however there is a more general notion of morphisms between
skew ﬁelds. It leads to an inequality between Betti numbers.
    A local homomorphism (or subhomomorphism) between two skew ﬁelds D and
D1 is a homomorphism from a subring L of D to D1 , f : L Ñ D1 whose kernel
is precisely the set of non-units of L. It follows that L is a local ring, J :“ ker f
is its unique maximal ideal, and JzL is a sub-skew ﬁeld of D1 . If M is a ﬁnitely
generated L-module, then by Nakayama’s lemma, cf. [30, Corollary 2.13], any
lift of a basis of JzL bL M “ JM zM to M is a generating set for M , therefore
dimD1 D1 bL M ě dimD D bL M . In terms of ranks we have an opposite inequality,
for any L-matrix A, rkD1 f pAq ď rkD A.
    Thus we have the following: suppose ZG Ñ D1 extends to a local homomorphism
from D to D1 , then
                                                     1
                               bG            G
                                ˚ pY ; Dq ď b˚ pY ; D q.
    If D is a sub-skew ﬁeld of D1 , then we have obvious local homomorphisms from
D to D1 and vice versa extending the map ZG Ñ D, which gives us
Change of coefficients. If D is contained in another skew ﬁeld D1 , then
                                            G       1
                              bG
                               ˚ pY ; Dq “ b˚ pY ; D q,
where the latter is computed using the composition ZG Ñ D ãÑ D1 . (This is also
a consequence of C˚ pY q bFG D1 “ pC˚ pY q bFG Dq bD D1 .)
  In particular, if φ : ZG Ñ D, we can always replace D with the skew ﬁeld
generated by the φpZGq, i.e. the division closure of φpZGq, without changing Betti
numbers.
Epic FG fields. There are two classical constructions (for certain amenable groups,
and for bi-orderable groups) of ZG skew ﬁelds. Both constructions depend on the
choice of a base ﬁeld F (we will be mostly concerned with F “ Q or F “ Fp ) and
produce canonical epic embeddings FG ãÑ DFG . (A homomorphism of FG into a
skew ﬁeld D is epic if the image of FG generates D.) Moreover, both constructions
behave nicely with respect to subgroups. If H ă G then the division closure of FH
in DFG coincides with DFH . If H happens to be ﬁnite index in G, then in both cases
DFG – ‘rG:Hs DFH , which implies a multiplicativity formula for the corresponding
Betti numbers. We shall use the same notation for both constructions, and let the
context distinguish them. This does not lead to confusion, as the constructions
agree when both are deﬁned.
   Of course the existence of such an embedding requires FG to have no zero divisors.
Conjecturally, FG has no zero divisors for any torsion-free group. It is known for
many classes of groups, in particular for left-orderable groups and for torsion-free
elementary amenable groups [52, Theorem 1.4].
   We now discuss both constructions.
Amenable groups. Suppose R is a ring without zero divisors, and S is a multi-
plicatively closed subset of nonzero elements. The pair pR, Sq satisﬁes the (right)
Ore condition if for each r P R and s P S there are r1 P R and s1 P S with
                                     rs1 “ sr1 .
If the pair pR, Sq satisﬁes the Ore condition, then one can form a ring called the
Ore localization RS ´1 . The elements of RS ´1 are equivalence classes of fractions
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                        17


r{s, r P R, s P S; the Ore condition allows one to add and multiply these expres-
sions. There is a natural injection R Ñ RS ´1 , given by r ÞÑ r{1. If S is the set
of all nonzero elements of R, then RS ´1 is a skew ﬁeld, and we get an epic em-
bedding R ãÑ RS ´1 . This embedding is a unique epic embedding, since any other
embedding factors through it.
   For a group ring, R “ FG without zero divisors, the pair pFG; FG ´ t0uq satisﬁes
the Ore condition if and only if G is amenable [9, Theorem A.1]. In this case we
shall denote the localization by DFG . So, to summarize, for amenable G with FG
having no zero divisors we have a unique epic embedding FG ãÑ DFG . If G is
amenable and FG has no zero divisors, then this also holds for all subgroups of G
and their group rings. Furthermore, if H ă G then we can identify DFH with the
division closure of FH inside of DFG . If G is in addition residually ﬁnite, then we
also have a version of Lück’s Approximation theorem, which is the main result of
Linnell, Lück, and Sauer [55, Theorem 0.2].
Theorem 3.1 ([55, Theorem 0.2]). Suppose G is amenable and FG has no zero
divisors. Let Gi ⊳ G be a residual sequence of finite index normal subgroups of G.
Then for any cocompact free G-CW complex Y
                                                b˚ pY {Gi ; Fq
                          bG
                           ˚ pY ; DFG q “ lim                  .
                                          iÑ8     rG : Gi s
Bi-orderable groups. As another example, suppose the group G is bi–orderable,
and ﬁx a particular bi-invariant total order on G. The Malcev–Neumann series are
inﬁnite linear combinations of elements in G with F coeﬃcients, whose support is
well ordered in the induced order. They form a skew ﬁeld, into which the group
ring FG naturally embeds. Let DFG denote the division closure of FG in this skew
ﬁeld.
   One can easily see from the construction of inverses that if a is a non-zero Malcev–
Neumann series then the support of a´1 is contained in the subgroup generated by
the support of a.
   Therefore, for a subgroup H the set of elements of DFG supported on H is a
sub-skew ﬁeld, and it follows that the division closure of FH in DFG is naturally
identiﬁed with DFH , coming from the induced order on H.
   Since the action of G on cosets preserves the induced order, a similar picture
holds for the set of elements of DFG supported on a single coset, it has a natural
structure of a vectorÀspace over DFH . This gives an injective homomorphism of
DFH -vector spaces:     G{H DFH Ñ DFG .
   The injectivity of this homomorphism is a (very strong) form of the so called
Hughes-free condition, so the embedding FG ãÑ DFG is Hughes-free. Hughes [40]
proved that for a given F, Hughes-free epic embeddings are unique up to an iso-
morphism over FG, thus DFG does not depend on the choice of the order, and we
obtain well-deﬁned Betti numbers bG  ˚ pY ; DFG q.
   We also have an approximation theorem of a diﬀerent ﬂavor.
Theorem 3.2. Let Ki be a nested residual sequence of normal subgroups in a
group G. Suppose we have bi-invariant orderings on G and on the quotients Gi “
G{Ki such that each quotient map pi : G Ñ Gi is order-preserving. Then for any
cocompact free G-complex Y there exist i0 such that for any i ě i0 ,
                          bG               Gi
                           ˚ pY ; DFG q “ b˚ pY {Ki ; DFGi q.
18             GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


Proof. Following [28, 54] deﬁne a sequence of subrings tSi u of DFG with Si Ă Si`1
consisting of elements whose support has ﬁnite intersection with Ki -cosets. A slight
generalization
      Ť         of the Malcev–Neumann argument, cf. [54, Proposition
                                                                   Ť       7.1], shows
that Si is a skew ﬁeld. Since each Si contains FG, we have Si “ DFG . Note
that the maps pi obviously extend to maps pi : Si Ñ DFGi .
   Given a matrix A over FG, we can diagonalize A over DFG by performing column
and row operations: there exist DFG -matrices C and C 1 , such that CAC 1 “ IrkDFG A .
The entries of C and C 1 are a ﬁnite collection of elements of DFG , so they are all
contained in Si0 for some i0 . Then for i ě i0 , applying pi to the above diagonaliza-
tion shows that rkDFG A “ rkDFGi pi pAq. Choosing i0 so that the above works for
all diﬀerentials in Y ﬁnishes the proof.                                            
                          Ť
Remark. The skew ﬁeld Si has been recently used by Sikorav in [71] to give a
new ﬁbering criterion for closed aspherical 3-manifolds.
Finite index subgroups. It turns out that in both cases the equivariant Betti
numbers have an additional nice property satisﬁed by the usual L2 -Betti numbers,
namely multiplicativity for ﬁnite index subgroups.
Lemma 3.3. Suppose G is bi-orderable or amenable with FG having no zero-
divisors, and H ă G is a finite index subgroup. Then for any G-complex Y
                         bH                      G
                          ˚ pY ; DFH q “ rG : Hsb˚ pY ; DFG q.

Proof. For bi-orderable groups, if H ă G has ﬁnite index, then the full Malcev–
Neumann skew ﬁeld of G is a vector space of dimension rG : Hs over the full Malcev–
Neumann skew ﬁeld of H, and these skew ﬁelds give the same Betti numbers as
                                                          rG:Hs
DFH and DFG . In particular, it follows that DFG – DFH as DFH -vector spaces.
   This also holds in the amenable case, see e.g. [55, Equation 5.2] for a more general
statement. For convenience, we give the argument here assuming that there are no
zero-divisors. It is enough to consider normal subgroups. The main point is that
the pair pFG, S “ FH ´ t0uq satisﬁes the Ore condition [68, Lemma 13.3.5 (ii)],
so we can form the localization pFGqS ´1 . This is a DFH -vector space of dimension
rG : Hs which naturally injects into DFG . We claim that this is onto; it suﬃces
to show that each nonzero t in FG is invertible in pFGqS ´1 . Since t is not a zero
divisor in DFG , it is not a zero divisor in pFGqS ´1 , hence the left multiplication by
t induces an injective linear self-map of pFGqS ´1 . Therefore, this multiplication is
an isomorphism, and the preimage of 1 is the inverse of t.                            

Finite generation. Note that we did not assume that the group G is ﬁnitely
generated. We now show that in both constructions we can always reduce the
                k pY ; DFG q to the case of ﬁnitely generated G.
computation of bG
  First, we need the following observation.
Induced representation. If H ă G is a subgroup and Y0 is an H-complex, then for
Y “ G ˆH Y0 we have
                             bG            H
                              ˚ pY ; Dq “ b˚ pY0 ; Dq,
where the latter is computed using the composition ZH ãÑ ZG Ñ D, since the
chain complexes used to compute the two homologies are identical:
            C˚ pY0 q bFH D “ C˚ pY0 q bFH FG bFG D “ C˚ pY q bFG D.
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                        19


Lemma 3.4. Suppose G is a bi-orderable or amenable group with FG having no
zero-divisors, and Y is a cocompact, free G-complex. For each connected component
of Y {G choose its lift Yi to Y , and let Gi denote the stabilizer of Yi in G. Then
each Gi is finitely generated and
                                              ÿ
                                              n
                          bG
                           k pY ; DFG q “           bG
                                                     k pYi ; DFGi q.
                                                       i

                                              i“1

Proof. Since each Yi is a connected cocompact free Gi -complex,
                                                             šn each Gi is ﬁnitely
generated. Y is a disjoint union of G-orbits of Yi , i.e. Y “ i“1 G ˆGi Yi . In both
constructions the division closure of each FGi in DFG is DFGi . Therefore
                                  ÿ
                                  n                        ÿ
                                                           n
                bG
                 k pY ; DFG q “         bG
                                         k pYi ; DFG q “
                                           i
                                                                 bG
                                                                  k pYi ; DFGi q.
                                                                    i

                                  i“1                      i“1

                                                                                    

Torsion-free nilpotent groups. Let N be a torsion-free nilpotent group. Then
N is both bi-orderable and amenable, and both constructions produce the same
skew ﬁeld DFN . It will be most useful here to think of DFN as an Ore localization.
Lemma 3.5. Let N be a torsion-free nilpotent group. Then for any free, cocompact
N -CW complex Y
                        bN
                         ˚ pY ; DFN q ď b˚ pY {N ; Fq.

Proof. By Lemma 3.4 we can assume that N is ﬁnitely generated. Let C “ xty be
a normal, inﬁnite cyclic subgroup of N with H “ N {C torsion-free nilpotent. The
existence of such a subgroup follows from the fact that the center ZpN q of N is
inﬁnite and N {ZpN q is torsion-free nilpotent [68, Lemma 11.1.3, p. 470].
    The quotient map N Ñ H induces a map p : FN Ñ FH and ker p is the two-
sided principal ideal generated by p1 ´ tq. We claim that p extends to a local
homomorphism DFN Ñ DFH where the domain consists of elements which have a
representation with denominator not in ker p. The only nontrivial part of this claim
is that the domain is a subring of DFN , or equivalently, that pFN, S :“ FN ´ ker pq
satisﬁes the Ore condition.
    To see this, take r P FN and s P S. Since pFN ; FN ´ t0uq satisﬁes the Ore
condition, there are r1 , s1 P FN with rs1 “ sr1 , and we need to show that s1 can be
chosen in S.
    The key point is that there is a bound on the powers of p1 ´ tq that divide
s1 . Indeed, take a coset of C which intersects the support of s1 nontrivially; for a
suitable choice of g P N the restriction of s1 to this coset has the form gP ptq where
P ptq is a polynomial in t. The right multiplication by p1 ´ tq preserves the coset
decomposition, hence the power of p1 ´ tq dividing s1 on the right is bounded above
by the degree of P ptq.
    Now, if s1 P ker p, then s1 r “ sr1 P ker p, and hence r1 P ker p as FH has no zero
divisors. Therefore, both s1 and r1 are divisible on the right by p1 ´ tq, and we can
cancel to get a new s1 and r1 . So, we can keep cancelling powers of p1 ´ tq until
s1 P S.
    Applying the same procedure to the quotient group H in place of N and com-
posing local homomorphisms eventually produces a trivial quotient and therefore a
local homomorphism DFN Ñ F extending the augmentation map.                           
20             GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


Residually torsion-free nilpotent groups. From now on, we suppose that the
group G is residually torsion-free nilpotent. Then G is bi-orderable, and in fact as
explained in [28, Corollary to Lemma 4.1], any torsion-free nilpotent approximation
can be made into an bi-orderable one by a suitable choice of orders. Then the equi-
variant Betti numbers of a G-complex Y are approximated by the equivariant Betti
numbers of the torsion-free nilpotent quotients, which in turn are approximated
by normalized usual Betti numbers of ﬁnite quotients. This leads to equivalence
between the skew ﬁeld deﬁnition and the inﬁmum deﬁnition for simply connected
Y.
Theorem 3.6. Let G be a residually torsion-free nilpotent group and let Y be a
free cocompact G-complex. Then
                                                     b˚ pY {H; Fq
                        bG
                         ˚ pY ; DFG q “     inf                   .
                                            HăG        rG : Hs
                                          rG:Hsă8

Proof. Let H ă G be a ﬁnite index subgroup of G. Choose a torsion free nilpotent
approximation Ki ⊳ H ։ Ni . Then, using Theorem 3.2 and Lemma 3.5, for
suﬃciently large i we have,
                  bH               Ni
                   ˚ pY ; DFH q “ b˚ pY {Ki ; DFNi q ď b˚ pY {H; Fq.

The multiplicativity now implies ď inequality in the desired formula.
   For the opposite inequality we ﬁrst ﬁnd, similar to the above, a torsion free
nilpotent quotient K ⊳ G ։ N with bG                   N
                                       ˚ pY ; DFG q “ b˚ pY {K; DFN q and then ap-
ply Theorem 3.1 to the N -complex Y {K to ﬁnd a further ﬁnite quotient so that
 ˚ pY {K; DFN q is approximated within any given ǫ by the normalized usual Betti
bN
numbers.                                                                        
Simply connected components. When the components of the G-complex Y are
simply connected, then we can use Theorem 3.6 to relate skew ﬁeld Betti numbers
to homology growth of the quotient Y {G (note that if Y is not simply connected
then the right-hand term in Theorem 3.6 is generally not equal to β˚inf pY {Gq).
Corollary 3.7. Suppose G is a residually torsion-free nilpotent group and Y is a
cocompact, free G-complex with simply connected components. Then
                            bG               inf
                             k pY ; DFG q “ βk pY {G; Fq.

Proof. By Lemma 3.4
                                            ÿ
                                            n
                          bG
                           k pY ; DFG q “         bG
                                                   k pYi ; DFGi q.
                                                     i

                                            i“1

where each Yi is a connected component of Y and Gi is its stabilizer. By assumption
each Yi is simply connected, so ﬁnite connected covers of Yi {Gi correspond to ﬁnite
index subgroups of Gi .                                                           ř
   Therefore, Theorem 3.6 and Lemma 2.8 imply that right hand side equals i βkinf pYi {Gi ; Fq.
Finally, additivity of β inf in disjoint unions identiﬁes this with βkinf pY {G; Fq. 
Remark. Droms [26] and Duchamp–Krob [27] independently showed that RAAG’s
are residually torsion-free nilpotent. Since this property passes to subgroups, the
fundamental group of any compact special cube complex in Haglund and Wise’s
sense is residually torsion-free nilpotent.
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                      21


Remarks. Many of the results in this section (and stronger versions) were previ-
ously known. The fact that for a torsion-free nilpotent group N there is a local
homomorphism DFN Ñ F extending the augmentation map follows from [72, The-
orem 2.2], which implies that the complement of the augmentation ideal in FN
satisﬁes the Ore condition. The local ring in this case then consists of fractions
with representatives f {g where g is not in the augmentation ideal.
   More generally, a skew ﬁeld D containing and generated by FG is called universal
if any homomorphism α : FG Ñ D1 can be extended to a local homomorphism
α : D Ñ D1 . Of course, if D is universal, there is a local homomorphism D Ñ F
extending the augmentation map, so we obtain the same statement as in Lemma
3.5. For instance, Passman [67] showed that if G is poly-Z, then DFG is a universal
division ring for FG.
   Jaikin-Zapirain [44, Corollary 1.3] proved that a residually (amenable locally in-
dicable) group has a Hughes-free epic embedding, and this embedding is universal.
The core of his construction is a very general form of the approximation theorem by
locally indicable quotients. He also observed [44, Proposition 2.2] that a recent re-
sult of Gräter [35, Corollary 8.3] that Hughes-free embeddings are strongly Hughes-
free implies multiplicativity of the equivariant Betti numbers, see also [31, Lemma
6.3] for more details. Since the Linnell–Lück–Sauer theorem applies to amenable
locally indicable groups, it follows that Theorem 3.6 holds for residually (amenable
locally indicable) groups. For these groups, Fisher, Hughes and Leary in a recent
paper independently proved one inequality in Theorem 3.6 in [32, Theorem D], and
applied this to show non-vanishing homology growth of non-virtually ﬁbered groups
in [32, Theorem 5.1].
   For F “ Q, there is another canonical construction due to Linnell of DQG that
(conjecturally) works for all torsion-free groups G. The von Neumann algebra N pGq
is known to satisfy the Ore condition with respect to the set of non-zero divisors,
and DQG is the division closure of ZG inside of OrepN pGqq. The ring OrepN pGqq
can be identiﬁed with the ring UpGq of aﬃliated operators on ℓ2 pGq. Since N pGq
has zero-divisors, OrepN pGqq is not a skew ﬁeld, so it is not obvious that DQG is
one. On the other hand, Linnell showed that DQG being a skew ﬁeld is equivalent
to Atiyah’s conjecture on integrality of L2 -Betti numbers for torsion-free groups,
and this is known for many classes of groups. If H ă G and the Atiyah conjecture
holds for G, then it also holds for H, DQH naturally embeds as a sub-skew ﬁeld of
DQG , and DQG is strongly Hughes-free. For general ﬁelds F, Jaikin-Zapirain and
Linton have conjectured that for any torsion-free group G there is an epic, strongly
Hughes-free, skew ﬁeld DFG containing FG which is unique up to FG-isomorphism
[45, Conjecture 1, p.7].


                 4. Applications of the skew field theory
   Let us collect some consequences of the skew ﬁeld theory from the last section.

Lower homology growth as skew field Betti number.

Corollary 4.1. If X is a finite complex with residually torsion-free nilpotent fun-
damental group G, then

                     β ˚ pX; Fq “ β˚inf pX; Fq “ bG  r
                                                  ˚ pX; DFG q P Z.
22                   GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


Proof. First, note that bG     r
                            ˚ pX; DFG q is a dimension of a vector space over a skew
ﬁeld, so it is an integer. Second, this dimension is equal to β˚inf pX; Fq by Theorem
3.6. Third, since bG    r
                     ˚ pX; DFG q is multiplicative by Lemma 3.3, the normalized β˚
                                                                                    inf

of ﬁnite covers of X are all equal to each other. Therefore β ˚ “ β˚inf . This ﬁnishes
the proof.                                                                           
   So, since the lower homology growth β is multiplicative, it can be thought of as a
multiplicative extension of the skew ﬁeld Betti number from residually torsion-free
nilpotent fundamental groups to more general settings where there is no nice skew
ﬁeld around.
Relation between Q and Fp . For a ﬁnite complex X let
                                                      logtor Hk pX 1 q
                                    τk pXqpX 1 q :“
                                                        |X 1 Ñ X|
denote the normalized log of the cardinality of the torsion of the integral homology
as a function on the poset of covers. By a lemma of Gabber ([1, Proposition 9.1])
τk pXq is a bounded function.
    The universal coeﬃcient theorem implies that
(1)                 0 ď pβk pX; Fp q ´ βk pX; Qqq log p ď τk pXq ` τk´1 pXq.
      The integrality of the skew ﬁeld Betti number leads to the following corollary.
Corollary 4.2. Suppose X is a finite complex with virtually residually torsion-free
nilpotent fundamental group G. Then for sufficiently large primes p we have
                                                                  p2q
                                 β k pX; Fp q “ β k pX; Qq “ bk pXq.
                                                                                1
Proof. This follows immediately from inequalities (1) and the fact that β k P rG:G 1s Z
                                                                   1
for some ﬁnite index residually torsion-free nilpotent subgroup G .                  
Relation between β and β. We now explain how to use a result of Fisher [31]
to reconcile vanishing of upper and lower F-homology growth for ﬁnite aspherical
complexes whose fundamental groups embed in right-angled Artin groups. More
precisely, Fisher needs the groups to be residually ﬁnite rationally solvable (RFRS),
a condition used in Agol’s ﬁbering criterion for 3-manifolds, see [2, Deﬁnition 2.1].
   The main result in Fisher’s paper [31] is:
Theorem 4.3 ([31, Theorem 6.6]). Suppose X is a finite aspherical complex whose
fundamental group G is RFRS. Then there is a finite cover X 1 Ñ X and a map
X 1 Ñ S 1 with homotopy fibre5 of type F Pn pFq if and only if bG  r
                                                                k pX; DFG q “ 0 for
all k ď n.
   In other words, the numbers bG     r
                                   k pX; DFG q are the only F-homological virtual
ﬁbering obstructions for a ﬁnite aspherical complex X in this setting. By Corollary
2.3 of [2], RAAGs are RFRS and it is not hard to see that the RFRS property
passes to subgroups. This along with Theorem 2.10 implies:
Theorem B. Suppose X is a finite aspherical complex whose fundamental group
G embeds in a right-angled Artin group. Then β k pX; Fq “ 0 for all k ď n if and
only if β k pX; Fq “ 0 for all k ď n.
      5In this case, this is just the inﬁnite cyclic cover of X 1 induced by the map to S 1 .
                HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                         23


                                    r
                                 k pX; DFG q “ β k pX; Fq ď β k pX; Fq. Suppose that
Proof. By Corollary 4.1 we have bG
    r DFG q “ 0 for all k ď n. Then, by Fisher’s theorem there is a ﬁnite cover
bG pX;
 k
X 1 Ñ X and a further regular inﬁnite cyclic cover X̂ 1 Ñ X 1 such that X̂ 1 is of type
F Pn pFq. In other words, X 1 is homotopy equivalent to the mapping torus Tg of
the covering translation g : X̂ 1 Ñ X̂ 1 . Therefore for k ď n we have, by Theorem
2.10, 0 “ β k pTg ; Fq “ β k pX 1 ; Fq, and by multiplicativity of β we conclude that
β k pX; Fq “ 0.                                                                      
     Poincaré duality implies:
Corollary 4.4. If M is a closed aspherical manifold whose fundamental group em-
beds in a right-angled Artin group, then β ąk pM ; Fq “ 0 if and only if β ąk pM ; Fq “ 0.
Remark. It follows from Jaikin-Zapirain’s work in [44] that Theorem B holds more
generally for ﬁnite aspherical complexes X with RFRS fundamental group, as RFRS
groups are residually (amenable locally indicable).

                                 5. Graph products
   In this section, we estimate the homology growth of graph products of ﬁnite
groups. In low dimensions, this will give us many examples of hyperbolic groups
where we have good control over the homology growth; in particular we can con-
struct hyperbolic groups where the homological growth depends on the coeﬃcient
ﬁeld.
Graph products of finite groups. Let L be a ﬂag complex with vertex set S,
and suppose tGs usPS is a collection of nontrivial groups indexed by S. Let  śGL be
the corresponding graph product. Given a simplex σ in L, we let Gσ “ sPσ Gs
denote the corresponding special subgroup of GL . Any graph product GL acts
naturally on a right-angled building of type pWL , Sq, which we now describe.
   Let KL be the geometric realization of the poset of simplices of L. Then KL is
isomorphic to the cone on the barycentric subdivision of L, with the empty simplex
corresponding to the cone point. Let BKL be the geometric realization of the poset
of nonempty simplices of L, which corresponds to simplices in KL not containing
the cone point. Recall that a mirrored complex consists merely of a complex X and
a collection of subcomplexes tXs usPS for some index set S. There is a canonical
mirror structure on KL with mirrors tKs usPS ; the s-mirror Ks is the geometric
realization of the subposet of simplices containing the vertex s. This is isomorphic
to the star of s in the barycentric subdivision of L.
   Let x be a point in KL , and let τ be a simplex containing x. Then τ corresponds
to a chain of simplices in L; let σpxq be the smallest element in this chain. We
deﬁne
                                 UpGL , KL q “ GL ˆ KL { „
where pg, xq „ pg 1 , x1 q if and only if x “ x1 and gGσpxq “ g 1 Gσpxq .
   If W – GL is a right-angled Coxeter group, then UpGL , KL q is the Davis com-
plex [20, Chapter 7], which we denote by ΣL . If GL is any graph product, then
UpGL , KL q is a right-angled building with apartments isomorphic to ΣL . In gen-
eral, GL acts on UpGL , KL q with strict fundamental domain KL . The stabilizers
of simplices are conjugates of Gσ for σ Ă L.
   From now on, we assume that the groups Gs are all ﬁnite. Then the right-angled
building admits the structure of a locally ﬁnite CAT(0) cube complex, which we now
24                 GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


              b                  BKL                b
                                                                                   ab   b    bc
                                               ab        bc
     a                  c              a                          c    Ka
                                                                               a                  c        KLkpaq
                                      ae                          cd      ae                          cd
                                                                                   e          d
         e          d                      e                  d
                                                    de
                                                                                        de

              L                                     KL                 Cubical structure on KL

             Figure 1. The Davis chamber KL and its cubical structure. The
             cone vertex in KL corresponds to the empty simplex in L, and
             BKL consists of simplices/cubes not containing the cone vertex.

describe. Firstly, KL can be naturally identiﬁed with a CAT(0) cubical subcomplex
of r0, 1sS ; KL is precisely the union of subcubes of r0, 1sS containing p0, 0, . . . , 0q
corresponding to the collections of vertices which span simplices in L. Note that
the link of the vertex p0, 0, . . . , 0q is isomorphic to L, and the vertices of each cube
can be identiﬁed with vertices of the barycentric subdivision of L.
    For a vertex s the mirror Ks is the intersection of KL with the hyperplane xs “ 1.
It is naturally isomorphic to the cubical complex KLkpsq . There is another parallel
embedding of KLkpsq into KL as a subchamber, given by the intersection with the
coordinate hyperplane xs “ 0. We will use both embeddings in the paper.
    This cubical structure extends to UpGL , KL q. The link of any vertex in UpGL , KL q
is isomorphic to the multiple join Lkpσq ˚ F1 ˚ ¨ ¨ ¨˚ Fdim σ`1 of a link of some simplex
σ in L with ﬁnite discrete sets Fi (it suﬃces to consider vertices in KL , in which
case the vertex is the barycentre
                           ś             of σ and the sets Fi come from translates of KL
by the local group Gσ “ sPσ Gs ). These are all ﬂag complexes since L is ﬂag. By
[20, Theorem 18.3.1], UpGL , KL q is simply connected, hence UpGL , KL q is CAT(0)
by Gromov’s criterion.
Estimating homology growth of graph products.
Theorem 5.1. Let GL be a graph product of finite groups. Suppose Γ ă GL is a
torsion free finite index subgroup and let n denote its index. Then
                            |bi pΓ; Fq{n ´ b̃i´1 pL; Fq| ď 2|BKL |{ min|Gs |
where |BKL | is the number of cubes in BKL and b̃˚ are the reduced Betti numbers.
Furthermore, if i “ dim L ` 1, then
                                       bi pΓ; Fq{n ď bi´1 pL; Fq
Proof. Since all GL stabilizers are ﬁnite, Γ acts freely on U, so we want to estimate
the homology of X “ U{Γ. Let p : X Ñ KL denote the projection and let Y “
p´1 pBKL q. X is tiled by copies of KL intersecting along Y .
   For a cube σ in KL the number of preimages |p´1 pσq| is n{|Gmin σ |, where min σ
is the smallest element in the chain corresponding to σ, and Gmin σ is the corre-
sponding special subgroup. In particular, the cubes in KL ´ BKL have n preimages,
and the cubes in BKL have at most n{ min|Gs | preimages. Thus in the long exact
sequence
              ¨ ¨ ¨ Ñ Hi pY ; Fq Ñ Hi pX; Fq Ñ Hi pX, Y ; Fq Ñ Hi´1 pY ; Fq Ñ . . .
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                          25


the dimensions of the ﬁrst and the last terms are bounded by |Y | ď n|BKL |{ min|Gs |
and the relative term is isomorphic to ‘n Hi pKL , BKL ; Fq, so its dimension is
nb̃i´1 pL; Fq. Therefore,
                    |bi pX; Fq{n ´ b̃i´1 pL; Fq| ď 2|BKL |{ min|Gs |.
If i “ dim L ` 1, then Hi pY ; Fq “ 0 so we get bi pΓ; Fq{n ď bi´1 pL; Fq.            
Corollary 5.2. If GL is a graph product of finite groups, then
                     |β i pGL ; Fq ´ b̃i´1 pL; Fq| ď 2|BKL |{ min|Gs |.
Remarks. A similar estimate in terms of thickness holds for torsion free uniform
lattices in chamber transitive buildings. For suﬃciently large thickness L2 -Betti
numbers of such buildings were computed in [22, Theorems 10.4(ii) and 13.8]. The
exact formula there has extra terms involving homology of certain subcomplexes of
BKL , however their contribution is of order 1/thickness.
    For right-angled Artin groups AL , [7] gives the exact computation β i pAL ; Fq “
b̃i´1 pL; Fq, so |β i pGL ; Fq ´ β i pAL ; Fq| ď 2|BKL |{ min |Gs |. We conclude that the
homology growth of a graph product of ﬁnite groups converges to the homology
growth of the corresponding right-angled Artin group as the minimum orders of
the groups go to inﬁnity.
Flag no-square triangulations. A ﬂag simplicial complex L is no-square if each
simplicial cycle of length four has a diagonal. If L is equipped with a piecewise
spherical metric with all edge lengths = π{2 (i.e. L is all right ), then the ﬂag no-
square condition is equivalent to L not having any closed geodesics of length ď 2π.
Suppose L is a ﬂag no-square simplicial complex, and GL is a graph product of
ﬁnite groups based on L. In this case, the right-angled building UpGL , KL q admits
a GL -equivariant CATp´1q metric, and in particular, GL is a hyperbolic group
[61], see also [20, Corollary 18.3.10]. Note that any graph product of nontrivial
groups based on a 4-cycle contains free abelian subgroups of rank 2, hence if L is
not no-square then GL is not hyperbolic. The construction of the ﬂag no-square
triangulations we require is due to Przytycki and Świątkowski.
Theorem 5.3 ([69, Corollary 2.14]). Let L be a simplicial complex of dimension
ď 3. Then there is a subdivision L1 of L which is flag no-square.
Remark. Theorem 5.3 only holds in dimensions ď 3, for instance there is no ﬂag no-
square triangulation of any 4-dimensional homology sphere [20, Proposition I.6.6].
In this generality, this is due to Moussong. Vinberg had earlier shown the non-
existence of compact right-angled convex polytopes in hyperbolic n-space for n ą 4
(the dual of the boundary would be a ﬂag no-square triangulation of S n for n ą 3).
Dependence on the coefficient field. Note that combining Theorem 5.1 with
Theorem 5.3 immediately gives some low-dimensional hyperbolic groups with β i pG; Fp q ą
β i pG; Qq (for example for p “ 2, we can take GL to be a graph product of large
ﬁnite groups over a ﬂag no-square triangulation of RP 2 ). In fact, a construction of
ﬂag no-square triangulations due to Osajda [66] gives examples in all dimensions:
Theorem 5.4. For any prime p and i ě 2 there is a hyperbolic right-angled Coxeter
group W with
                          β i pW ; Fp q ą β i pW ; Qq.
26             GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


Proof. Suppose that we have a ﬂag no-square L with bi pL; Fp q ą bi pL; Qq. If GL
is a graph product of pZ{2qN over L, then for N " 0 we have β i`1 pGL ; Fp q ą
β i`1 pGL ; Qq by Theorem 5.1. The group GL is also a right-angled Coxeter group
with ﬂag no-square nerve L1 (obtained from L by replacing each vertex with an
pN ´ 1q-simplex). The commutator subgroup of GL is the fundamental group of a
locally CATp´1q cube complex XL1 where the links are all isomorphic to L1 . By
Theorem 5.1 we have that bi`1 pXL1 ; Fp q ą bi`1 pXL1 ; Qq.
   Now, the “simplicial thickening” of a cube complex C is a simplicial complex
ThpCq with the same vertex set, where vertices span a simplex if and only if they
are contained in the same cube. It is easy to see that ThpCq is homotopy equivalent
to C. Osajda showed that if the link of each vertex in C is ﬂag no-square, then
the link of each vertex in ThpCq is ﬂag no-square [66, Lemma 3.2]. Therefore,
the thickening ThpXL1 q has ﬂag no-square links. By passing to a further ﬁnite
cover, we can assume that the injectivity radius is large, which implies it is ﬂag
no-square. Therefore, we can use ThpXL1 q as our next nerve to get dependence on
ﬁeld coeﬃcients in one higher dimension.                                         
Remark. Theorem 5.3 only holds in dimensions ď 3, for instance there is no ﬂag no-
square triangulation of any 4-dimensional homology sphere [20, Proposition I.6.6].
In this generality, this is due to Moussong. Vinberg had earlier shown the non-
existence of compact right-angled convex polytopes in hyperbolic n-space for n ą 4
(the dual of the boundary would be a ﬂag no-square triangulation of S n for n ą 3).
   This is a barrier to producing higher dimensional hyperbolic examples without
the Fp -Singer property. On the other hand, in [47], Januszkiewicz and Świątkowski
constructed ﬂag no-square triangulations of n-dimensional pseudomanifolds for any
degree n. A corollary is the existence of word-hyperbolic right-angled Coxeter
groups of arbitrarily high cohomological dimension.
   The top-dimensional homology of the examples in [47] does not depend on the
coeﬃcient ﬁeld. It would be interesting if one could construct d-dimensional, ﬂag
no-square L with Hd pL; Fp q ‰ 0 and Hd pL, Qq “ 0. Osajda [66] describes a simple
construction of ﬂag no-square L with Hk pLq ‰ 0 for any given k, however this
homology does not occur in the top dimension of L.
Virtual duality groups. We also recall the criterion for a graph product of ﬁnite
groups to be a virtual duality group. This will be used in the proof of Theorem F.
Theorem 5.5 ([24, Corollary 6.4]). A graph product GL of finite groups over a flag
complex L is a virtual duality group of dimension n if and only if for every simplex
σ of L (including the empty simplex), H ˚ pL ´ σ; Zq is torsion-free and concentrated
in dimension n ´ 1.
  In particular, for any ﬂag triangulation of S 3 , a graph product of ﬁnite groups
GS 3 is a virtual duality group of dimension 4.

                                 6. Thickenings
   In this section we construct our seed manifold N by building a manifold model
for the classifying space of a suﬃciently deep torsion free ﬁnite index subgroup in
an appropriately chosen graph product. We begin with a general statement, which
tells us when we can thicken these classifying spaces to manifolds of less than twice
their dimension.
             HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                       27


Theorem 6.1. Let GL be a graph product of finite groups based on a pd ´ 1q-
dimensional flag complex L. If d ą 3 and Hd´1 pL; F2 q “ 0 then GL has a finite
index subgroup ΓL which is the fundamental group of a compact aspherical p2d ´ 1q-
manifold with boundary.
   Before proving this theorem, we need to recall a number of previous results and
constructions. We will construct aspherical manifolds using the reﬂection group
method. To that end, the ﬁrst step is to embed a ﬁnite index subgroup of the graph
product GL into a right-angled Coxeter group based on a ﬂag complex OL, the
octahedralization of L as in the Introduction. This leads to the ﬁrst key ingredient
in our construction, which is commensurability between diﬀerent graph products
over the same ﬂag complex. Recall that two groups G and H are commensurable if
they have isomorphic ﬁnite index subgroups. They are strongly commensurable if
these ﬁnite index subgroups have the same index in G and H. Januszkiewicz and
Świątkowski proved the following:
Theorem 6.2 ([46, Theorem 1]). Suppose that GL and G1L are two graph products
of groups over the same flag complex L. Suppose that for all v P S, the group Gv is
strongly commensurable to G1v . Then GL is strongly commensurable to G1L .
  We shall also need the following lemma, which follows immediately from the
normal form for graph products.
Lemma 6.3. Suppose that GL is a graph product of groups over a flag complex L,
with vertex set S. For each s P S, choose a subgroup Hs of Gs . Then the graph
product HL corresponding to the Hs embeds as a subgroup of GL .
  These imply the following corollary.
Corollary 6.4. A graph product GL of finite groups over a flag complex L has a
torsion free finite index subgroup ΓL which embeds into WOL .
Proof. By Lemma 6.3 GL embeds into the graph product over L of direct products
Gv ˆ D8 , which by Theorem 6.2 is strongly commensurable to the graph product
over L of D8 of inﬁnite dihedral groups, since both Gv ˆ D8 and D8 contain Z
as a subgroup of index 2|Gv |. The graph product of D8 has a natural structure
of a right-angled Coxeter group WOL , hence its commutator subgroup has ﬁnite
index and torsion-free. Therefore intersecting a common ﬁnite index subgroup of
the latter two graph products with this commutator subgroup and then further
intersecting with GL produces the desired ΓL .                               

   In order to construct a contractible n-manifold on which the reﬂection group
WOL (and hence ΓL ) acts, we embed this group into the reﬂection group of a
ﬂag triangulation of an pn ´ 1q-sphere WS n´1 . This brings us to the second key
ingredient, which is a van Kampen style embedding theory for octahedralizations.
To construct “low-dimensional” manifold models for BΓL , we use the “if” direction
of the following embedding theorem for octahedralizations that we proved with
Davis in [6]:
Theorem 6.5 ([6]). Let L be a pd ´ 1q-dimensional flag complex. If d ‰ 3,
OL embeds as a full subcomplex of a flag triangulation of S 2d´2 if and only if
Hd´1 pL; F2 q “ 0.
28              GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


   Note that this theorem implies an embedding in one less dimension than general
position guarantees. Since the group ΓL will have inﬁnite index in the Coxeter
groups used to build the contractible manifold, the construction naturally leads
to non-compact aspherical manifolds. To perform the reﬂection trick in the next
section, we need to compactify such manifolds by adding a boundary. A complete
obstruction for doing so was developed by Siebenmann in his thesis [70]. Fortu-
nately, when d ą 3, one arrives at a manifold whose end has the same fundamental
group as its interior and the following theorem shows that the obstruction vanishes.
Theorem 6.6 (π–π compactiﬁcation theorem). Suppose N n is a one-ended PL
manifold, n ą 5. Also suppose π1 of the end ǫ is stable and the natural map
π1 pǫq Ñ π1 pN q is an isomorphism. Then N n is PL homeomorphic to the interior
of a compact PL manifold with boundary if and only if it has finite homotopy type.
   The π–π theorem follows directly from the results in [70] but is not explicitly
stated there, so we give the derivation below.
Proof of Theorem 6.6. The only if direction is clear, so we suppose that N has ﬁnite
homotopy type. Then our isomorphism assumption implies that π1 pǫq is ﬁnitely
presented, and by [70, Theorem 3.10] the end has arbitrarily small 1-neighborhoods.
This means that we have an arbitrarily small connected submanifold pV, BV q with
connected boundary and compact complement of the interior, and the inclusions
induce isomorphisms

                              π1 pBV q – π1 pV q – π1 pǫq.
Since π1 pǫq – π1 pN q by our assumption, the van Kampen theorem applied to the
decomposition N “ pN ´ V̊ q YBV V shows that also π1 pN ´ V̊ q – π1 pBV q. Then
[70, Complement 6.6(b)] implies that V is ﬁnitely dominated, and [70, The Sum
Theorem 6.5] implies that the ﬁniteness obstruction for V vanishes, and the claim
follows from the Main Theorem of [70].                                          
Remark. We want to emphasize that in the π–π situation one does not need to
assume that the end is ﬁnitely dominated, but gets it for free when the interior is
ﬁnitely dominated.
     We are now ready for the proof of the thickening theorem.
Proof of Theorem 6.1. By Corollary 6.4, we have a torsion free ﬁnite index sub-
group ΓL of GL which is also a subgroup of WOL . Theorem 6.5 gives us an embed-
ding of OL as a full subcomplex of a ﬂag triangulated sphere S 2d´2 . Since OL is a
full subcomplex, WOL is a subgroup of WS 2d´2 and on the level of Davis complexes
ΣOL Ă ΣS 2d´2 is a WOL -stable subspace.
   The quotient N :“ ΣS 2d´2 {ΓL is an aspherical p2d ´ 1q-manifold with funda-
mental group ΓL . This manifold has ﬁnite type since it is homotopy equivalent to
the ﬁnite complex UpGL , KL q{ΓL , but the manifold is not itself compact. To ﬁx
this, we will use the fact that N has another d-dimensional classifying space for ΓL
embedded inside of it, namely the d-complex Y :“ ΣOL {ΓL .
   Pick an exhaustion Ci of Y by ﬁnite subcomplexes. For each Ci pick a closed
PL regular neighborhood
              Ť             Ui in N such that Ui is contained in the interior of Ui`1 .
Then N 1 “ Ui is an open p2d ´ 1q-manifold containing Y and the embedding
Y ãÑ N 1 is a homotopy equivalence. Since d ą 3, Ci has codimension ě 3 in N 1 , so
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                        29


the map pN 1 ´ Ci q Ñ N 1 is an isomorphism on π1 , and the same is true for the map
from the complement of the regular neighborhood pN 1 ´ Ui q Ñ N 1 . Therefore π1
of the end ǫ of N 1 is stable and the natural map π1 pǫq Ñ π1 pN 1 q is an isomorphism.
Moreover the dimension 2d ´ 1 is greater than ﬁve, and N 1 is homotopy equivalent
to Y and hence to N , so it has ﬁnite type. Therefore, it follows from Theorem
6.6 that N 1 is PL homeomorphic to the interior of a compact PL manifold with
boundary. This ﬁnishes the proof.                                                    

   The last paragraph of the proof only uses the fact that Y has ﬁnite type and has
codimension three inside a manifold of dimension greater than ﬁve. So, it gives the
following result which may be of independent interest.
Proposition 6.7. Fix n ą 5. Let Y d be a complex of dimension d ď n ´ 3. If Y
has finite type and PL embeds in an n-manifold, then Y is homotopy equivalent to
a compact PL n-manifold with boundary.
Construction of the 7-dimensional seed manifold. Finally, combining Corol-
lary 5.2, Theorem 5.3, and Theorem 6.1 gives the following:
Theorem 6.8. For any odd prime p, there is a compact, aspherical 7-manifold with
boundary pN, BN q such that π1 pN q is special hyperbolic and β 4 pπ1 pN q; Fp q ‰ 0.

Proof. Let L be a ﬂag no-square triangulation of the complex S 2 Yp D3 , where D3
is glued onto S 2 by a degree p map. This triangulation exists by Theorem 5.3. Let
GL be a graph product of large ﬁnite groups over this L. Then GL is virtually
special hyperbolic and for any ﬁnite index subgroup ΓL we have β 4 pΓL ; Fp q “
β 4 pGL ; Fp q|GL {ΓL | ‰ 0 by Corollary 5.2. We can pick ΓL to be special and, by
Theorem 6.1, to be π1 of a compact aspherical 7-manifold N 7 .                  

                  7. A hyperbolic reflection group trick
   In this section, we describe how to build a closed, aspherical manifold M out
of copies of a compact aspherical manifold with boundary N . The idea is to com-
bine the Davis reﬂection group trick with the strict hyperbolization procedure of
Charney–Davis [18]; it has the advantage of preserving hyperbolicity (and as we
shall see, a host of other properties including virtual specialness). The output is
very similar to the relative strict hyperbolization procedure of Belegradek [10, 11],
which combines the relative hyperbolization of Davis–Januszkiewicz–Weinberger
[23] with strict hyperbolization. Our hyperbolic reﬂection group trick has one ma-
jor diﬀerence with Belegradek’s procedure: our output has many disjoint copies of
the input N , whereas his output has only one. This makes our construction easier
to work with, but doesn’t give all of the applications in [10, 11].

Strict hyperbolization. Charney and Davis deﬁne a hyperbolization procedure
that converts any piecewise Euclidean, locally CAT(0), cube complex K of dimen-
sion ď n into a piecewise hyperbolic, locally CATp´1q, polyhedron hK (the output
hK depends on n). Roughly speaking, this replaces every n-cube with a hyper-
bolic n-manifold with boundary so that k-cubes are replaced by totally geodesic
k-dimensional submanifolds. Charney and Davis construct the hyperbolized n-cube
CDn by cutting a closed arithmetic hyperbolic n-manifold An along a suitable col-
lection of codimension-one totally geodesic submanifolds. Let Bn denote the ﬁnite
30             GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


Coxeter group of type Bn —the symmetry group of the cube r0, 1sn. More precisely,
Charney and Davis prove:
Theorem 7.1 ([18, Theorem 6.1]). For each n ą 0, there is a closed connected
hyperbolic n-manifold An , a collection W1 , . . . , Wn of codimension-one closed con-
nected submanifolds, and an isometric action of Bn on An satisfying:
      ‚ Wi is a component of the fixed set of a standard generator of Bn .
      ‚ Each Wi is totally geodesic.
      ‚ The Wi ’s intersect orthogonally.
      ‚ An and Wi are orientable.
      ‚ W1 X ¨ ¨ ¨ X Wn is a single point tyu.
      ‚ Bn fixes y and the representation on Ty An is equivalent to the standard
        representation.
   Cutting An along the tWi u leaves a compact, connected, orientable hyperbolic
n-manifold with corners CDn with isometric Bn action. Each Wi is itself cut by
other Wj ’s, the boundary of CDn contains two disjoint copies of each cut-open Wi
and is covered by these copies. A codimension k face of CDn is a nonempty k-fold
intersection of these cut-open copies.
Theorem 7.2 ([18, Corollary 6.2]). The manifold CDn has the following properties:
    ‚ There is a degree one map f : CDn Ñ r0, 1sn which induces a Bn -equivariant
      isomorphism between the face posets of CDn and r0, 1sn.
    ‚ Each codimension-one face of CDn is connected and totally geodesic, and
      the faces intersect orthogonally.
    ‚ Each 0-dimensional face is a single point.
   Note that although Wi are totally geodesic and connected, they are not nec-
essarily convex because the geodesics between points in An are not unique. So
lower-dimensional faces of CDn are totally geodesic submanifolds, which however
are generally not connected.
   Given a cube complex K of dimension ď n, thought of as a collection of cubes
glued via isometries between faces, Charney and Davis deﬁne the n-dimensional
hyperbolization hK of K by gluing via isometries copies of faces of CDn in the
same combinatorial pattern. In general this relies on the Bn isometric action and
the equivariance of the face posets isomorphism. If K is foldable, i.e. K admits a
cellular map p : K Ñ r0, 1sn such that the restriction to any cell is a combinatorial
isomorphism, then hK is the same piecewise hyperbolic polyhedron as the ﬁber
product
                     hK “ tpk, xq P K ˆ CDn | ppkq “ f pxqu
  Of course, there is a choice of CDn , but for any such choice the hyperbolization
procedure satisﬁes the following:
Theorem 7.3 (Charney–Davis [18, Corollary 7.1.]). Let K be a locally CAT p0q
cube complex of dimension ď n. Then there is a piecewise hyperbolic, locally
CATp´1q space hK, and a map q : hK Ñ K such that:
    (1) For each k-cube C k in K, q ´1 pC k q is isometric to a k-dimensional face of
        CDn . If J is a subcomplex of K, then q ´1 pJq is isometric to hJ.
    (2) The link of q ´1 pC k q is isometric to the link of C k in K.
    (3) h(a point) = a point.
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                          31


    (4) If J is a totally geodesic subcomplex of K, then hJ is totally geodesic in
        hK.
   Recall that if K is a locally CAT(0) cube complex and J a subcomplex, then
there is an easy to verify link condition to check that J is totally geodesic. In
particular, J is totally geodesic if for each vertex v P K, LkJ pvq is a full subcomplex
of LkK pvq; i.e. if the vertices of a simplex are contained in LkJ pvq, then that simplex
is contained in LkJ pvq.
A hyperbolic reflection group trick. Suppose pN, BN q is a manifold with
boundary, and BN is triangulated as a ﬂag simplicial complex (this can always
be ensured by taking a barycentric subdivision). For the moment, we forget about
the manifold N , and concentrate on the ﬂag triangulation of the boundary, which
we will denote by B. It determines a right-angled Coxeter group WB , and hence
a locally CAT(0) cube complex PB whose fundamental group is the commutator
subgroup of WB . The complex PB can be also described as the basic construction
           0
UppZ{2q|B | , KB q, so it folds onto the Davis chamber KB .
   If we remove a neighborhood of each cone vertex and replace with a copy of N ,
this is precisely the output of a right-angled Davis reﬂection group trick. However,
the fundamental group will generally not be hyperbolic.
   Instead, we ﬁrst apply the Charney–Davis strict hyperbolization procedure to
PB . This produces a piecewise hyperbolic locally CATp´1q polyhedron hPB . Since
the strict hyperbolization preserves vertices and links it has the same number of
singular vertices as PB and the link of each one is still isomorphic to B.
   We now choose ǫ small enough so that in CDn the ǫ-ball around a vertex is
isometric to the intersection of the ǫ-ball in Hn with an octant. We resolve the
singularities by removing ǫ-neighborhoods of each vertex in hPB and replacing them
with copies of N .
   This produces a closed manifold M equipped with a map to hPB . When we want
to emphasize the building blocks involved in the construction of M, we will also
denote it by hPBN .
   In some sense, the rest of the paper is concerned with showing that, for an
appropriate choice of Charney–Davis piece CDn and triangulation B, the ambient
manifold M inherits many properties from its seed N .
Resolved chambers. We let hKBN denote the hyperbolized Davis chamber hKB
with a ǫ-neighborhood of the cone point replaced with a copy of N , and similarly
we denote by KBN the same procedure applied to the original Davis chamber. We
will refer to these as resolved (hyperbolized) Davis chambers.
   The symmetry of PB lifts to M, so M can be described as a basic construction
                                                   0
obtained by reﬂecting around hKBN using pZ{2q|B | . The mirrors are hyperboliza-
tions of the mirrors Kv of the Davis chamber for v P B, and we will denote them by
hpKv q. They are isomorphic to hKLkpvq .
                                                                           0
Universal cover of M. Since M is a basic construction UppZ{2q|B | , hKBN q, its
universal cover MĂ is itself a basic construction, where the base space is the universal
cover of hKB and the mirror structure is lifted from the mirror structure downstairs.
             N

This is a general fact about basic constructions, and we review the general statement.
Let pX, tXs usPS q be a mirrored space, W the corresponding RACG, and UpW, Xq
the associated basic construction. Let π : X  r Ñ X be the universal cover of X, and
32                GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


                                                       PB
                  pN, BN q




            hPB                                       hPBN


          Figure 2. The construction of hPBN . Starting with a triangulation
          of B, we ﬁrst construct a locally CAT(0) cube complex PB and
          then a locally CAT(-1) space hPB where the vertices all have links
          isomorphic to BN . Then, each of these links is replaced with a
          copy of N to form hPBN .


let Sr be the set of components of preimages of Xs over all s P S. We will denote
such a component of π ´1 pXs q by s̃. The map π induces a natural map Sr Ñ S
sending each s̃ to s. We deﬁne a RACG W            Ă with generating set Sr as follows: for
s̃ ‰ t̃, set ms̃t̃ “ 2 if the lifts s̃ and t̃ intersect, and set ms̃t̃ “ 8 otherwise; it is
clear that π determines a group homomorphism W              Ă Ñ W . Let Ur “ UpW Ă , Xq
                                                                                     r be
the corresponding basic construction.
   By [20, Theorem 9.1.3], Ur is simply connected, and the map pπ, πq : Ur Ñ
UpW, Xq is the universal covering map.
   The π1 pXq-action on X    r induces an action of π1 pXq on W      Ă by automorphisms, so
                                             Ă
we can form the semidirect product W ¸ π1 pXq. This semidirect product acts on
Ur by setting
                              pw̃, gq ¨ pw̃1 , xq “ pw̃gpw̃1 q, gxq.
in fact, the semidirect product is precisely the group of lifts of the W -action to r
                                                                                    U.
Therefore, there is an exact sequence
                                         Ă ¸ π1 pXq Ñ W Ñ 1.
                      1 Ñ π1 pUpW, Xqq Ñ W
                                                                        Ă ¸π1 phK N q.
     Note that for M, the group W is ﬁnite, so π1 pMq is ﬁnite index in W        B
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                         33


Basic properties of the hyperbolic reflection group trick (Proof of The-
orem D(1)–(4)). We collect some basic properties of the hyperbolic reﬂection
group trick in the theorem below. It follows from previous work of Davis–Januszkiewicz–
Weinberger [23] and Belegradek [11], but since our construction is slightly diﬀerent,
we provide a sketch of the proof.
Theorem D(1)–(4). The manifold M satisfies the following properties:
  (1) M retracts onto N , hence π1 pN q injects into π1 pMq.
  (2) If N is aspherical, then M is aspherical.
  (3) If N is F-aspherical, then M is F-aspherical.
  (4) π1 pMq is relatively hyperbolic relative to the collection of subgroups corre-
                          0
      sponding to the 2|B | copies of N . Therefore, if π1 pN q is hyperbolic, then
      π1 pMq is hyperbolic.
Proof. The manifold M folds onto hKBN , which maps onto KBN ﬁxing N , which in
turn deformation retracts onto N . This induces a retraction of M onto N , and
hence an injection π1 pN q Ñ π1 pM q.
    Thus, in the universal cover M  Ă of M, N lifts to copies of its universal cover
 r                                  r
N . If we replace each copy of N with a cone on its boundary B N         r , we obtain a
branched cover hP B of hPB , and π1 pMq now acts with cone vertex stabilizers equal
to conjugates of π1 pN q. Since Nr is simply connected, the map M Ă Ñ hP B collapsing
copies of N r to cone points is a π1 -isomorphism, so hP B is simply connected.
    Lifting the metric from hPB gives hP B the structure of a piecewise hyperbolic
space. The links of the cone vertices are disjoint copies of B N  r , which covers BN ,
and hence are ﬂag complexes. Therefore, hP B is locally CATp´1q as away from
the cone points hP B is locally isometric to hPB . Since hP B it is simply connected
it is CATp´1q and therefore contractible. Now, if N is aspherical, then each N      r is
                                                                      Ă
contractible and the collapse map is a homotopy equivalence, so M is contractible,
and therefore M is aspherical.
    Similarly, if N is F-aspherical, then each Nr is F-acyclic and the collapse map is
an F-homology equivalence, so M   Ă is F-acyclic, which means that M is F-aspherical.
    Next, since the 1-skeleton of hP B of quasi-isometric to hP B , it is a δ-hyperbolic
graph. To prove relative hyperbolicity we need to show that this graph is fine in
the sense of Bowditch [15]. This amounts to showing that for each cone, if we delete
the cone point from the graph, then in the metric of the deleted graph any bounded
subset of the vertices in the link hP B is ﬁnite. Since the cones are convex in hP B
(they are ǫ-balls), and since the nearest point projection onto a convex subset of a
CATp´1q space is distance decreasing, the distance in the deleted graph is bounded
from below by the inner metric on B N    r . The claim now follows from the fact that
π1 pN q acts properly and cocompactly on B N   r.
    Finally, if π1 pN q is hyperbolic, and π1 pMq is hyperbolic relative to π1 pN q, it
follows [29, p. 822] that π1 pMq is hyperbolic.                                       

                        8. Virtual specialness of π1 pMq
   A group G is cocompact special if it is the fundamental group of a compact special
cube complex in Haglund and Wise’s sense [37]. All our special cube complexes
will be compact, so following [36] we will drop the word ‘cocompact’. We will be
mostly concerned with virtually special hyperbolic groups. By Agol’s theorem [3],
34             GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


these are precisely the hyperbolic groups which admit cocompact proper actions
on CAT(0) cube complexes. For example, the hyperbolic graph products of ﬁnite
groups considered in Section 5 are virtually special.
   In this section, we will show that the fundamental groups of strict hyperboliza-
tions hPL are virtually special. We also show that if a seed manifold N has virtually
special hyperbolic fundamental group then so does the manifold M obtained via
the hyperbolic reﬂection group trick. One utility of this is that a virtually special
hyperbolic group G virtually retracts onto any quasi-convex subgroup H ă G. This
will let us do cutting arguments and estimate the homology growth of M from that
of its constituent pieces in Section 9.

Virtual specialness of Charney–Davis pieces. We start by recalling that the
arithmetic manifold An , and hence CDn , has virtually special fundamental group.
The manifold An is constructed via arithmetic methods, and involves some number
of choices. We can take it to be the quotient of the hyperbolic space Hn by a
congruence subgroup of the orthogonal group of the quadratic form
                              ?
                           1` 5 2
                         ´       x0 ` x21 ` x22 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` x2n
                             2
               ” ? ı
over the ring Z 1`2 5 . This is a uniform arithmetic lattice of simplest type (we
give a deﬁnition and discuss some properties of such lattices in Section 10.)
   Moreover, as pointed out in [17], for n ď 7 the orthogonal group is virtually
a Coxeter group. The manifolds Wi that we cut An along are images under the
covering projection of hyperplanes in Hn given by setting xi “ 0 for 1 ď i ď n.
Charney and Davis showed that if Γ is any torsion-free congruence subgroup of the
orthogonal group, then all the conditions of Theorem 7.1 hold. In [38], Haglund
and Wise showed virtual specialness for such lattices, see also [13] for an alternative
approach.
Theorem 8.1 ([38],[13]). Uniform arithmetic lattices in Hn of simplest type are
virtually special.
   The group π1 pCDn q acts on a right-angled convex polyhedron in Hn with in-
ﬁnitely many sides, precisely the intersection of halfspaces bounded by certain
translates of the hyperplanes xi “ 0. This implies that π1 pCDn q is a quasicon-
vex subgroup of π1 pAn q, see also [53, Lemma 5.8]. Since quasiconvex subgroups of
hyperbolic virtually special groups are virtually special, we have
Corollary 8.2. The fundamental group of a Charney–Davis piece is virtually spe-
cial.
Virtual specialness of hyperbolized cones. Our manifold M is constructed
by reﬂecting hKBN ; so we ﬁrst show that π1 phKBN q is virtually special. We begin
by showing that the fundamental groups of strictly hyperbolized cones are virtually
special, and then do the resolved case.
   Let L be a ﬂag complex, and let hKL be the corresponding hyperbolized cone.
If A Ă L is a full subcomplex, then by the Link Condition, KA is a totally geodesic
cubical subcomplex of KL . Hence, by Theorem 7.3(4), hKA is a totally geodesic
subspace of hKL , and even though KA and KL are contractible, the hyperboliza-
tions hKA and hKL have quite complicated topology.
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                       35


   Note that if v is a vertex of L, then the above subcomplex hKLkpvq is diﬀerent
than the mirror hpKv q used to reﬂect the hyperbolized Davis chamber around in
the previous section. Indeed, that subcomplex was a hyperbolization of the cubical
star of the vertex rvs in BKL , whereas this is the hyperbolization of the subcomplex
of cubes containing the cone point and corresponding to simplices in Lkpvq.
Theorem 8.3. Let L be a finite pk ´ 1q-dimensional flag complex, and suppose
that hKL is obtained by applying the n-hyperbolization procedure to KL with n ě k.
Then the connected components of hKL have virtually special fundamental group.
   To prove this, we use the following result of Groves and Manning, which gener-
alizes Wise’s notion of a quasiconvex hierarchy for virtually special groups.
Theorem 8.4 (Groves–Manning [36, Theorems A and D]). Suppose that G is a
hyperbolic group acting cocompactly on a CATp0q cube complex X so that vertex
stabilizers are quasi-convex and virtually special. Then G is virtually special.
Proof of Theorem 8.3. We induct on the number of vertices of L. If L is a simplex,
then KL is a single cube. Therefore, the fundamental group of each component of
hKL is a Charney–Davis piece (or face of such), and so by assumption is virtually
special. Otherwise, we can ﬁnd a vertex s such that Stpsq is not equal to L, which
gives us a decomposition of L into proper full subcomplexes:
                             L “ Stpsq YLkpsq pL ´ sq.
This decomposition induces a decomposition of KL into totally geodesic cubical
subcomplexes
                          KL “ KStpsq YKLkpsq KL´S,
and hence a decomposition of hKL into totally geodesic subcomplexes
                          hKL “ hKStpsq YhKLkpsq hKL´s .
   Now, take a connected component of hKL . This is a union of components of
hKStpsq and hKL´s meeting along components of hKLkpsq . This union gives us
a graph of groups decomposition with vertex groups the fundamental groups of
components of hKStpsq and components of hKL´s , and edge groups the fundamental
groups of components of hKLkpsq . By induction on the number of vertices, these
fundamental groups are virtually special, and they are all quasiconvex as they
correspond to totally geodesic subcomplexes of hKL . The action on the associated
Bass–Serre tree and Theorem 8.4 imply that each component of hKL has virtually
special fundamental group.                                                     
Unnatural embeddings. We now adapt the argument in the previous subsec-
tion to the resolved case. The idea is exactly the same; we inductively cut along
hyperbolized walls hKLkpvq for v a vertex of B.
   In general, there is no canonical way of embedding hKLkpvq into hKBN . However,
given any vertex v of B, there is an “unnatural” embedding hKLkpvq Ñ hKBN which
sends the cone point of hKLkpvq to v (and a neighborhood of the cone point to the
star of v in B).
   To describe the result of the cutting we need to consider a more general situation.
Each full subcomplex A of B determines a subspace hKA       N
                                                               of hKBN , obtained by
replacing an ǫ-neighborhood of the cone point in hKA with a copy of N glued
along A.
36             GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE




                                             v




         Figure 3. An “unnaturally” embedded hKLkpvq inside of hKBN .

   As before, given any vertex v of A, there is again an unnatural embedding of
hKLkA pvq into hKAN
                    (and hence into hKBN ) sending the cone point of hKLkA pvq to
v.
Lemma 8.5. For any full subcomplex A of B and any vertex v P A, the compo-
nents of the unnaturally embedded walls hKLkA pvq are π1 -injective in hKBN , and the
corresponding subgroups are quasiconvex.
Proof. A priori hKLkA pvq may be disconnected, and hence the image of the un-
natural embedding into hKBN may be disconnected as well. However there is a
distinguished component of the image containing v. This component is unnatu-
rally embedded, and the embeddings of the other components are unchanged, i.e.
including these into hKBN and composing with the collapse map q : hKBN Ñ hKB
agrees with the natural embedding into hKB . The intersection of the distinguished
component with N is the subcomplex Stpvq, which is contractible, and therefore
the composition with the collapse map is homotopic to the natural embedding into
hKB . Therefore, the restriction of q˚ : π1 phKBN q Ñ π1 phKB q to π1 phKLkA pvq q is an
isomorphism for each component of hKLkA pvq .
   Since the groups π1 phKBN q and π1 phKB q are hyperbolic and hKLkA pvq is totally
geodesic in hKd , the quasiconvexity claim follows from the following general lemma:
Lemma 8.6. Let G and H be hyperbolic groups, φ : G Ñ H a homomorphism, and
K a subgroup of G. If φpKq is quasiconvex in H and φ|K is an isomorphism, then
K is quasiconvex in G.
Proof. Note that K – φpKq which is quasiconvex in H and hence ﬁnitely generated.
Given any subgroup K of G, the inclusion map is Lipschitz with respect to the
word metrics, so we only have to check lower bounds. Let k and k 1 be elements
in K. Then dG pk, k 1 q is linearly bounded from below by dH pφpkq, φpk 1 qq. Since
φpKq is quasiconvex, dH pφpkq, φpk 1 qq is bounded from below by a linear function in
dφpKq pφpkq, φpk 1 qq. Since φ|K is an isomorphism it induces a quasi-isometry between
K and φpKq. These combine to give a lower bound for dG pk, k 1 q by a linear function
in dφpKq pφpkq, φpk 1 qq.                                                           


Virtual specialness of resolved hyperbolic cones. To extend Theorem 8.3 to
the resolved case, we need the following well-known lemma:
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                         37


Lemma 8.7 ([16, Proposition 1.2]). Let G be a hyperbolic group which splits as a
finite graph of groups. If each edge group is quasiconvex, then each vertex group is
quasiconvex.
Theorem 8.8. If π1 pN q is a virtually special hyperbolic group, then π1 phKBN q is
virtually special hyperbolic.
Proof. We inductively cut along these unnaturally embedded walls in hKBN . At
each inductive step, we are cutting hKA    N
                                             along an unnaturally embedded hKLkA pvq
for some full subcomplex A. Let XA denote the component of hKA         N
                                                                          containing
N . The components of hKA other than XA are the same as components of hKA ,
                              N

and hence have virtually special fundamental group by Theorem 8.3. Therefore, we
focus on the cutting’s eﬀect on XA .
   Removing hKLkA pvq decomposes XA into a graph of spaces where the edge
spaces are components of hKLkA pvq , and the vertex spaces are either components of
hKStA pvq or XA´v . The components of hKLkA pvq and hKStA pvq again have virtually
special π1 by Theorem 8.3, and π1 pXA´v q is virtually special by induction on the
number of vertices; the base case here is when A is a disjoint union of simplices, so
π1 pXA q is a free product of π1 pN q and fundamental groups of Charney–Davis pieces,
and hence is hyperbolic and virtually special. By Lemma 8.5 the edge groups are
quasiconvex, and hence by Lemma 8.7 so are the vertex groups. Again, by Theorem
8.4 we are done.                                                                   
Hyperbolic reflection group trick preserves virtual specialness (Proof of
Theorem D(5)). We now extend this to our hyperbolic reﬂection group trick M.
Theorem D (5). If π1 pN q is virtually special hyperbolic, then π1 pMq is virtually
special hyperbolic.
                                                                                     0
Proof. We have that M is obtained by reﬂecting around hKBN using pZ{2q|BN | .
We saw in Section 7 that M   Ă is a basic construction obtained by reﬂecting around
                            N
the universal cover of hKB , where the RACG W     Ă has generators corresponding to
components of preimages of mirrors in hKB . There is a natural action of π1 phKBN q
                                            N

   Ă induced by the action on the universal cover of hK N , and π1 pMq is a ﬁnite
on W                                                         B
index subgroup of W  Ă ¸ π1 phK N q.
                                 B
   Now, let Σ r denote the corresponding Davis complex for W    Ă , equipped with its
Coxeter cellulation (in particular, the 1-skeleton of Σr is identiﬁed with the Cayley
graph of WĂ ). This gives Σ  r the structure of a ﬁnite dimensional, locally inﬁnite,
CAT(0) cube complex.
   The group π1 phKBN q acts on Σ  r via its action permuting the generators of W    Ă,
and this extends to an action of W Ă ¸ π1 phK N q on Σ.
                                                     r There is one orbit of vertices,
                                              B
and a ﬁnite number of orbits of edges since there are a ﬁnite number of π1 phKBN q-
orbits of mirrors upstairs. Since Σ r is ﬁnite dimensional this implies the action is
cocompact. The stabilizer of a vertex is conjugate to π1 phKBN q. We have shown
                                          Ă ¸ π1 phK N q retracts onto π1 phK N q, it is
that this is virtually special, and since W          B                        B
quasiconvex. Therefore, we are done by Theorem 8.4.                                   
Virtual retractions. The same argument applied to hKL in place of hKBN shows
that the fundamental group of each hPL is hyperbolic and virtually special. We
record a corollary of the fact that the hPL have virtually special fundamental groups
38               GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


and work of Haglund–Wise [37, Sections 6 and 7] that we will use in the next section
in order to prove Mayer–Vietoris inequalities for homology growth of manifolds
obtained by the hyperbolic reﬂection group trick.
   We need a few simple observations, which are true for general complexes. Given
a map f : Z Ñ X we say that Z is a virtual retract of X if there exist a ﬁnite cover
p : X r Ñ X, an injective lift g : Z ãÑ X r of f , and a retraction r : X r Ñ Z such
that rg “ idZ .
Lemma 8.9. Suppose f : Z Ñ X and Z consists of finitely many components Zi .
If each Zi is a virtual retract of X, then Z is a virtual retract of X.
Proof. By assumption, there are ﬁnite covers Xi Ñ X,   š lifts gi
                                                               š : Zi ãÑ Xi and
retractions ri : Xi Ñ Zi . These assemble to a lift Z “ Zi ãÑ Xi “: X r and a
retraction X r Ñ Z.                                                           
Lemma 8.10. Suppose f : Z Ñ X is a virtual retract. Then, in the notation of
the above definition:
    (1) If q : X 1 Ñ X is a finite cover of X, then the pullback q ˚ pZq “ f ˚ pX 1 q is
        a virtual retract of X 1 .
    (2) If t : Z 1 Ñ Z is a finite cover of Z, then Z 1 is a virtual retract of X r .
    (3) f ˚ pCX q is a cofinal subset of CZ .
    (4) If f : Z ãÑ X is a retract of X, then f ˚ pCX q “ CZ .
Proof. Under the assumptions of (1), the pullback q ˚ pX r q “ p˚ pX 1 q is a cover of
X 1 which retracts onto q ˚ pZq via q ˚ prq. This proves (1).
   Under the assumptions of (2), the pullback t˚ pX r q “ r˚ pZ 1 q is a ﬁnite cover of
X which retracts onto Z 1 via t˚ prq. This proves (2).
  r

   Starting with a ﬁnite cover Z 1 of Z, we can think of r˚ pZ 1 q as a ﬁnite cover of
X. Let X 1 be a further regular cover of X. Since X 1 is regular and covers X r ,
p˚ pX 1 q is a disjoint union of copies of X 1 covering X r . Since g ˚ pr˚ pZ 1 qq “ Z 1 ,
regarding X 1 as a cover           ˚     1                                 1
                         šof˚X ,1 g pX q is 1a cover of Z which covers Z . Therefore,
                                r
 ˚    1       ˚ ˚    1
f pX q “ g p pX q “ g pX q covers Z as well. This proves (3).
   If Z is a retract of X, then Z 1 “ f ˚ r˚ pZ 1 q for any ﬁnite cover Z 1 of Z, hence
p4q.                                                                                   
     The following lemma is a direct consequence of the homotopy extension property.
Lemma 8.11. A subcomplex i : Z ãÑ X is a retract if and only if the inclusion i
has a left homotopy inverse r : X Ñ Z.
     Our source of virtual retracts is provided by work of Haglund–Wise.
Theorem 8.12 ([37, Theorem 7.3]). Let G be a hyperbolic virtually special group
and H ă G a quasiconvex subgroup. Then there is a finite index subgroup of G
which retracts onto H.
Corollary 8.13. If A Ă L is a full subcomplex, then hPA is a virtual retract of
hPL .
Proof. By Lemma 8.9, it is enough to show that each component of hPA is a
virtual retract, and since the components of all the spaces involved are aspherical,
Lemma 8.11 implies that it is enough to construct a virtual retract on the level of
fundamental groups. Since each component hPA is a totally geodesic subspace of
               HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                         39


hPL , its fundamental group H is a quasiconvex subgroup of the fundamental group
G of hPL . So, we are done by Theorem 8.12.                                    
Corollary 8.14. For a full subcomplex A of a link in B, let hPA ãÑ hPBN be the
unnatural embedding. Then hPA is a virtual retract of hPBN .
Proof. Pull back the virtual retraction produced in the previous corollary by the
collapse map hPBN Ñ hPB .                                                      
Remark. A recent result [53] of Lafont and Ruﬀoni also shows that the manifolds
hPS r have virtually special fundamental groups. In fact, since any ﬂag complex L
embeds as a full subcomplex of some ﬂag S N , the components of hPL are totally
geodesic inside of hPS N , and hence their results show these have virtually special
fundamental groups. More generally, they show that if X is an n-dimensional locally
CAT(0) cube complex with each cube contained in an n-cube, and every pn ´ 1q-
cube contained in at least two n-cubes, then hX is virtually special. To do this,
they show that the fundamental group of the hyperbolization hX acts on a certain
cube complex with stabilizers that are quasi-convex subgroups in the arithmetic
hyperbolic n-manifolds An , prove that cube complex is CAT(0), and apply Theo-
rem 8.4. Our argument does not construct such a complex. Instead, we observe
that (since the initial complex has the form PL ) the fundamental group of hPL
acts on a Davis complex (which is deﬁnitely a CAT(0) cube complex) with vertex
stabilizers that are retracts (hence quasi-convex) and isomorphic to fundamental
groups of hyperbolized cones hKL (which may not embed in arithmetic hyperbolic
n-manifolds), show these stabilizers are virtually special by the cutting argument
in Theorem 8.3, and then apply Theorem 8.4.

                         9. Mayer–Vietoris arguments
   Our goal in this section is to control the homology growth of a space X in terms
of the homology growth of simpler pieces the space can be cut into. This will be
used to compute the homology growth of the manifold M that we constructed in
Section 7 in terms of the seed manifold N .
Mayer–Vietoris inequalities for homology growth.
Lemma 9.1 (Restricted Mayer–Vietoris inequalities). Suppose X “ A1 YB A2 .
           X
   (1) If β k´1 pBq “ 0 then
                                         X           X
                             β k pXq ď β k pA1 q ` β k pA2 q.
           X
   (2) If β k pBq “ 0 then
                                   βX
                                    k
                                      pAi q ď β k pXq,
                                     X
                                   β k pAi q ď β k pXq.
Proof. For any cover X 1 Ñ X denote the induced covers by 1 . The Mayer–Vietoris
sequence
        ¨ ¨ ¨ Ñ Hk pB 1 q Ñ Hk pA11 q ‘ Hk pA12 q Ñ Hk pX 1 q Ñ Hk´1 pB 1 q Ñ . . .
implies that on the poset CX the normalized Betti functions satisfy
                       βk pXq ď βk pA1 q ` βk pA2 q ` βk´1 pBq.
40              GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE

                                                                           X
Taking the upper limit of this inequality over CX and noting that β k´1 pBq “ 0
proves part (1) of the lemma. The same Mayer–Vietoris sequence implies that on
CX
                        βk pA1 q ` βk pA2 q ď βk pBq ` βk pXq.
                                                                               X
Taking the upper or lower limit of this inequality over CX and using β k pBq “ 0
and subadditivity Lemma 2.2(2) proves (2).                                    
     Applying the second part of the above Lemma repeatedly gives the following.
Corollary 9.2. Suppose X has a filtration A0 “ X0 Ă X1 Ă ¨ ¨ ¨ Ă Xm “ X with
                        X
Xi “ Xi´1 YBi Ai . If β k pBi q “ 0 for all i, then
                                     βX
                                      k
                                        pA0 q ď β k pXq,
                                        X
                                     β k pA0 q ď β k pXq.
  These inequalities are only useful when we can get rid of restriction on the covers,
and this is one thing the virtual retractions from Section 8 are good for. Parts (3)
and (4) of Lemma 8.10 together with Lemma 2.2(3) imply:
Corollary 9.3 (Virtual retractions). Suppose A is a virtual retract of X. Then
                                                   X
                           βpAq ď β X pAq ď β pAq ď βpAq.
If A is a retract of X, then the left and right inequalities are equalities.
  Applying Corollary 9.3 to Lemma 9.1 and Corollary 9.2 results in the following
two corollaries about homology growth that we will use later in the paper.
Corollary 9.4 (Absolute Mayer–Vietoris inequalities). Suppose X “ A1 YB A2 .
Suppose further that A1 , A2 and B are virtual retracts of X. Let d be the degree of
a cover of X which retracts to A1 .
    (1) If β k´1 pBq “ 0, then
                                β k pXq ď β k pA1 q ` β k pA2 q.
     (2) If β k pBq “ 0, then

                                      β k pAi q ď β k pXq,
         and
                                    β k pA1 q ď d ¨ β k pXq.
Proof. (1) and the ﬁrst inequality in (2) follows immediately from the restricted
version and Corollary 9.3 applied to Ai and B.
   For the second part of (2), pass to a ﬁnite cover X r Ñ X which retracts onto
A1 . Then the induced cover A11 Ñ A1 has a section. In other words, A11 contains a
copy of A1 , so
                                     Xr            Xr
                                   β k pA1 q ď β k pA11 q.
                                   Xr
Since A1 is a retract of X r , β k pA1 q “ β k pA1 q. Now apply restricted version to
decomposition X r “ A11 YB 1 A12 and use multiplicativity to get
                                    Xr
                      β k pA1 q ď β k pA11 q ď β k pX r q “ d ¨ β k pXq.
                                                                                   
               HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                         41


Corollary 9.5 (Cutting down to a virtual retract). Suppose that X has a filtration
A0 “ X0 Ă X1 Ă ¨ ¨ ¨ Ă Xm “ X with Xi “ Xi´1 YBi Ai , and that A0 and each Bi
are virtual retracts of X. Let d be the degree of a cover of X which retracts to A0 .
If β k pBi q “ 0 for all i, then
                                    β k pA0 q ď β k pXq,

                                   β k pA0 q ď d ¨ β k pXq.

  In particular, if β k pA0 q ‰ 0 then β k pXq ‰ 0.

Mayer–Vietoris inequalities via skew fields. One of the nice features of the
skew ﬁeld DFG described in Section 3 is that—in situations when it is available—it
provides a simple, alternate framework for doing Mayer–Vietoris cutting arguments.
We record this here. (It is not needed in the proofs below, but can be used as an
alternative to the inequalities above in special cases.)
   Suppose X has residually torsion-free nilpotent fundamental group G and let
D “ DFG be the skew ﬁeld from Section 3. If X “ A1 YB A2 then (only in this
subsection) use ˆ to denote the induced G-covers. Then we have a Mayer–Vietoris
sequence


¨ ¨ ¨ Ñ HkG pB̂; Dq Ñ HkG pÂ1 ; Dq ‘ HkG pÂ2 ; Dq Ñ HkG pX̂; Dq Ñ Hk´1
                                                                     G
                                                                         pB̂; Dq Ñ . . .

for homology with coeﬃcients in D. If B ãÑ X is π1 -injective, then the Ai are as
well, and then we can identify the D-dimensions of the D-vector spaces appearing
in this sequence with lower homology growth by Corollary 3.7:

                                  bG
                                   k pB̂; Dq “ β k pB; Fq,

                                 bG
                                  k pÂi ; Dq “ β k pAi ; Fq.

Therefore, the Mayer–Vietoris sequence gives the usual inequalities ((1) and (2) be-
low) for lower homology growth. Using multiplicativity of β extends these inequal-
ities to complexes X with virtually residually torsion-free nilpotent fundamental
groups. In summary, we get

Lemma 9.6. Suppose a finite complex X with virtually residually torsion-free nilpo-
tent fundamental group decomposes as a union X “ A1 YB A2 with π1 -injective
intersection.
    (1) If β k´1 pB; Fq “ 0 then β k pX; Fq ď β k pA1 ; Fq ` β k pA2 ; Fq,
    (2) If β k pB; Fq “ 0 then β k pX; Fq ě β k pA1 ; Fq ` β k pA2 ; Fq.

  Iterating the second part of the lemma gives

Corollary 9.7. Suppose a finite complex X with virtually residually torsion-free
nilpotent fundamental group has a filtration A0 “ X0 Ă X1 Ă ¨ ¨ ¨ Ă Xm “ X with
Xi “ Xi´1 YBi Ai , and that each Bi ãÑ X is π1 -injective. If β k pBi ; Fq “ 0 for all
i, then
                                 β k pA0 ; Fq ď β k pX; Fq.
42             GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


A spectral sequence in even dimensions. If we have a large collection of sub-
complexes, it is more convenient to use a spectral sequence rather than inductively
cutting and using Mayer–Vietoris. We record the spectral sequence we will use
below, in our setting we only need to consider an ambient manifold and a collection
of codimension-one submanifolds.
   Suppose M is a closed manifold, and tXs uŤis a ﬁnite collection of closed codimension-
one submanifolds, such that the pair pM, Xs q looks locally like a hyperplane
arrangement in Rn .                       Ť
   Removing a regular neighborhood of Xs from M produces a manifold with
boundary pZ, BZq, the cut-open M . We call the collection tXs u tractable if, in
addition, the inclusions of Z and of each intersection XJ of the walls into M are
virtual retractions. Note that by Lemma 8.9 this is equivalent to the disjoint union
of Z and all XJ being a virtual retract.
Lemma 9.8 (Even chopping). Let pM 2n , tXs uq be a tractable collection of codi-
mension one submanifolds and pZ, BZq the resulting cut-open manifold. Suppose all
intersections of walls have the upper F-Singer property, and that Z is a retract of
a d-fold cover of M . Then for k ą n,
                        β k pM ; Fq ď β k pZ; Fq ď d ¨ β k pM ; Fq,
and
                                β k pZ; Fq ď β k pM ; Fq.
                   2n
In particular, M   has the upper F-Singer property if and only if Z 2n has.
                 Ť                  Ş                                M
Proof. Let X :“ Xs and XJ :“ sPJ Xs . First we claim that β k pXq “ 0 in
degrees k ă n.
Ť To see this, consider the spectral sequence for the homology of the union X “
  Xs . Then the k-th Betti number
                               À      of X is bounded from above by the sum of
dimensions of the terms Ei,j
                           1
                              “ |J|“j`1 Hi pXJ ; Fq with i ` j “ k. Taking covers,
normalizing and taking the upper limit over CM gives
                           M         ÿ     ÿ      M
                         β k pXq ď              β i pXJ q.
                                      i`j“k |J|“j`1

Since all XJ are virtual retracts of M , we have
                            M         ÿ      ÿ
                          β k pXq ď              β i pXJ q.
                                       i`j“k |J|“j`1

Since all Xs are odd-dimensional and have the upper F-Singer property, all the
terms in this sum with j “ 0 are 0. Similarly, since the components of a pj ` 1q-fold
intersection XJ are manifolds of dimension ě 2n ´ pj ` 1q and have the upper
F-Singer property, for j ě 1, β i pXJ q “ 0 for i ă p2n ´ pj ` 1qq{2. This inequality
is equivalent to i ` j ă n ` pj ´ 1q{2, and the claim follows.
   Next, let N pXq denote a closed regular neighborhood of X and note that the
pair pM, N pXqq excises to pZ, BZq, so by Lemma 2.2 and the long exact sequence
                Ñ Hk pXq Ñ Hk pM q Ñ Hk pZ, BZq Ñ Hk´1 pXq Ñ
we have
                                          M           M
                            β k pM q ď β k pXq ` β k pZ, BZq,
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                           43


and
                           M                         M
                         β k pZ, BZq ď β k pM q ` β k´1 pXq,
                                                     M
                         βM
                          k
                            pZ, BZq ď β k pM q ` β k´1 pXq.
By the above claim the terms with X vanish for k ă n. Thus, for k ă n,
                     M
                    β k pZ, BZq “ β k pM q,    βM
                                                k
                                                  pZ, BZq ď β k pM q.
Therefore by Poincaré duality, for k ą n,
                          M
                         β k pZq “ β k pM q,   βM
                                                k
                                                  pZq ď β k pM q.
Since Z is a virtual retract of M , Corollary 9.3 implies β k pM q ď β k pZq and β k pZq ď
β k pM q for k ą n.
    For the remaining inequality, we ﬁrst pass to a degree d cover M r which retracts
onto Z. By Lemma 8.10(1) the preimage of tXs u is a tractable collection in M r . It
cuts down M r to the preimage Z 1 of Z, which consists of Z and other components.
A similar argument as above shows that for k ą n,
                            Mr          Mr
                β k pZq “ β k pZq ď β k pZ 1 q “ β k pM r q “ d ¨ β k pM q.
                                                                                       
A β-acyclic covering lemma. There is a class of spaces, generalizing Salvetti
complexes of right-angled Artin groups, for which a Mayer–Vietoris argument gives
a complete computation of both upper and lower homology growth, and shows that
these computations agree. We record this here. The proof is essentially the one
given in [7].
Lemma 9.9. Suppose X is a complex covered by finitely many subcomplexes tUi u
and let N be the nerve of this cover. Suppose each non-empty intersection Uσ :“
Ş                   X
  iPσ Ui is either β -acyclic or a point. Let L be the subcomplex of the nerve
                                  X
consisting of simplices σ with β -acyclic Uσ . Then
                          β k pX; Fq “ bk pN , L; Fq “ β k pX; Fq.
Proof. It is enough to consider connected covers. Let X 1 Ñ X be a ﬁnite connected
cover of X. The Mayer–Vietoris spectral sequence for the ﬁnite covering tUi1 u of
X 1 by preimages of the Ui converges to H˚ pX 1 ; Fq and the assumptions imply that
its E 1 page
                             1
                           Ej,k pX 1 q “ Cj pN ; Hk pUσ1 ; Fqq
is concentrated on the Ej,0
                         1
                             line up to an error that is sublinear in the degree
   1
|X Ñ X|. Set               #
                      1      H0 pUσ1 ; Fq if Uσ is a point,
                    Vσ :“                           X
                             0            if Uσ is β -acyclic.
                                                                               X
The chain map Cj pN ; H0 pUσ1 ; Fqq Ñ Cj pN ; Vσ1 q which collapses the β -acyclic
part of the coeﬃcients is onto and has kernel of dimension that is sublinear in
|X 1 Ñ X|. Putting these two observations together shows that βpX; Fq and βpX; Fq
are the upper and lower limits of the normalized Betti numbers b˚ pN ; Vσ1 q{|X 1 Ñ
X|. Finally, the chain complex C˚ pN ; Vσ1 q can be identiﬁed with C˚ pN , L; Fq bF
Frπ1 pXq{π1 pX 1 qs, so these normalized Betti numbers are all equal to b˚ pN , L; Fq
44                 GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


independent of the choice of X 1 Ñ X. This implies the equations in the statement
of the lemma.                                                                  
   If the Uσ are virtual retracts of X then Corollary 9.3 implies that we can replace
 X
β -acyclic by β-acyclic. The basic example to which this Lemma applies is the
cover of the Salvetti complex of a right angled Artin group AL by maximal tori. In
that case all intersections are retracts, either non-trivial tori (hence β-acyclic) or
points, the nerve is contractible, and the subcomplex L is homotopy equivalent to
L. This gives the computation from [7] mentioned in the introduction:
                             β k pAL ; Fq “ b̃k´1 pL; Fq “ β k pAL ; Fq.
                      X
If one only has β -acyclicity up to an error δ, then the equalities in Lemma 9.9
hold up to an error on the order of |N |δ. Applying this to the classifying space of a
graph product GL of ﬁnite groups Z{m (and noting that each of the vertex groups
Gv – Z{m is a retract of GL and β-acyclic up to error 1{m) gives an alternative
way of obtaining estimates for homology growth of these graph products similar to
the ones we got in Section 5.

                          10. Inductive structure of F-Singer
   Suppose that pN, BN q is a compact n-manifold with boundary, B is a ﬂag trian-
gulation of the boundary and M “ hPBN is the closed n-manifold constructed from
this data via the hyperbolic reﬂection group trick.
Proposition 10.1. Either β k pN ; Fq ď β k pM; Fq or there is a full subcomplex L of
a flag triangulated S n´2 such that β k phPL ; Fq ‰ 0.
Proof. Removing vertices of B one at time (and using the unnatural embedding of
hPLkpvq to cut) shows, by Corollary 9.5, that β k pM; Fq ě β k pN ; Fq ą 0 as long
as β k phPL ; Fq “ 0 for all full subcomplexes L of links of vertices Lkpvq “ S n´2 in
B.                                                                                  
   So, to prove Theorem C(1), we need to understand the upper homology growth
of the hyperbolizations hPL . That is one of the main subjects of this section. But,
before we get there, we ﬁrst analyze some special hyperbolic manifolds.

On F-Singer for hyperbolic manifolds of simplest type. Let us start by
showing for the class of closed arithmetic hyperbolic manifolds of simplest type
that if there is a counterexample to upper F-Singer property, the smallest one
occurs in odd dimension.
   We recall the deﬁnition. Let k ă R be a totally real algebraic number ﬁeld, let
O denote its ring of integers. Suppose pV, Qq a quadratic vector space over k of
dimension pn ` 1q, such that pV bkσ R, Qσ q is positive deﬁnite for each nontrivial
place σ, and have signature pn, 1q for the trivial one. Let L be a Z-lattice in V , i.e.
L is a free abelian subgroup V such that L b Q “ V . Following [73, p. 217] we will
call a group Γ an arithmetic group of simplest type 6 if Γ is commensurable to the
stabilizer StabOpQq pLq. In fact, this deﬁnition is independent of the choice of the
lattice L as the following lemma shows.

     6Also called of simple type, Type I, or standard.
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                          45


Lemma 10.2. If L and L1 are Z-lattices in V , then StabOpQq pLq is commensurable
to StabOpQq pL1 q.
Proof. By taking intersections, it is enough to consider the case when L1 ă L.
Then a ﬁnite index subgroup of StabOpQq pLq stabilizes L1 . Since there exists m P N
such that mL ă L1 , and StabOpQq pLq “ StabOpQq pmLq, a ﬁnite index subgroup of
StabOpQq pL1 q stabilizes L, and the claim follows.                                
   We also need the following.
Lemma 10.3. Let Γ ă OpQq be an arithmetic group of simplest type. If U is a
k-subspace of V such that Q|U K is positive definite, then StabΓ pU q is an arithmetic
group of simplest type.
Proof. Let L1 ă U and L2 ă U K be Z-lattices. Then L “ L1 ‘ L2 is a Z-lattice in
V . Therefore Γ1 :“ StabOpQq pLq is commensurable with Γ. We have StabΓ1 pU q “
StabOpQ|U q pL1 qˆStabOpQ|U K q pL2 q. Since Q|U K is positive deﬁnite, the second factor
is ﬁnite, and we are done.                                                             
   In particular, if we identify V with k n`1 , scale the form Q so that it has coeﬃ-
cients in O and take L “ On`1 , the stabilizer StabOpQq pOn`1 q gets identiﬁed with
the orthogonal group OpQ, Oq of matrices preserving the form with entries in O.
Thus, up to commensurability, we recover the deﬁnition in [38].
   Note that, by taking the trivial place, OpQq ă Opn, 1q, and StabOpQq pLq is a
lattice in Opn, 1q. A standard application of Mahler’s compactness criterion, cf.
[64, Proposition 5.3.4], shows that this lattice is uniform if and only if 0 is the only
solution in On`1 to the equation Qpxq “ 0.
   We will say that a hyperbolic manifold H “ Hn {Γ is of simplest type if Γ is an
arithmetic group of simplest type.
Lemma 10.4. Let H be a compact hyperbolic manifold of simplest type. Then
there is a finite cover of H with a tractable collection of codimension-one submani-
folds of simplest type whose complement is a disjoint union of open discs, and each
intersection in this collection is also a manifold of simplest type.
Proof. Suppose Γ “ π1 pHq is associated to a quadratic space pV, Qq over a ﬁeld k.
Choose v P V with Qpvq ă 0, and identify Hn with the sheet of the hyperboloid
Qpxq “ Qpvq in V bk R containing v. Consider the Dirichlet domain corresponding
to the orbit Γv which contains v. The bounding hyperplanes of this domain come
from linear hyperplanes in V bk R whose normal vectors has the form γv ´ v.
Therefore these linear hyperplanes are k-rational subspaces (have the form U bk R
for U a subspace of V ). Hence the Γ-stabilizers of the bounding hyperplanes are
cocompact arithmetic groups of simplest type and the bounding hyperplanes project
to immersed compact submanifolds of H. Hence, taking the full preimage i.e. all Γ-
translates of these bounding hyperplanes, gives a locally ﬁnite Γ-invariant collection
of k-rational hyperplanes.
   Since the stabilizers of hyperplanes are quasiconvex subgroups, by Theorem 8.12
each is a virtual retract of Γ1 . This implies that by passing to a further ﬁnite
cover H 1 , we can arrange that each hyperplane from this collection maps to an
embedded submanifold and is a virtual retract. Note that the components of the
complement of this collection in Hn are all disks as they are ﬁnite intersections
of halfspaces. Since each component is contained in a translate of the Dirichlet
46             GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


domain, it is bounded, and hence each component of the complement downstairs
in H 1 is also a disk. Thus we obtain a tractable collection in H 1 . Finally, we note
that the intersection of k-rational hyperplanes is k-rational, so all intersections in
this collection are hyperbolic manifolds of simplest type.                          
Remark. As explained in [12], in general not all totally geodesic closed submanfolds
of H arise from k-rational subspaces. Such submanifolds are still of simplest type,
but the ﬁeld of deﬁnition of the restricted quadratic form may increase.
   Applying Lemma 9.8 and noting that vanishing of β is a commensurability in-
variant gives
Corollary 10.5. If there is a closed arithmetic hyperbolic manifold of simplest type
that does not have the upper F-Singer property, then there is such a manifold of odd
dimension.
   By Agol’s ﬁbering theorem for closed hyperbolic 3-manifolds, the dimension of
a potential counterexample is at least 5. Now we are ready to discuss hyperboliza-
tions.
On F-Singer property for hyperbolizations. If L is a full subcomplex of a ﬂag
triangulated sphere S m´1 , then hPL has a natural thickening in hPS m´1 , which
is an m-manifold with boundary. We do not know whether or not there are hy-
perbolizations hPL that do not have upper F-Singer property, but we will show
that if there are such examples then the lowest dimensional ones can be realized by
closed manifolds of the form hPS n´1 . Moreover, if the lowest dimension n is even,
then hPO∆n´1 does not have upper F-Singer property. To that end ﬁx an initial
Charney–Davis piece of some large dimension N , a ﬁeld F, and for n ď N consider
the progressively stronger statements
   (1n ) β k phPO∆n´1 ; Fq “ 0 for k ą n{2,
   (2n ) β k phPS n´1 ; Fq “ 0 for k ą n{2, for ﬂag triangulated spheres S n´1 ,
   (3n ) β k phPL ; Fq “ 0 for k ą n{2, for full subcomplexes L in ﬂag S n´1 .
   Statement 2n is the upper F-Singer property for the closed manifolds hPS n´1 ,
while 3n is the upper F-Singer property for a thickening of hPL inside of hPS n´1 .
   Finally, since hPO∆n´1 is just a ﬁnite cover of the initial Charney–Davis manifold
An , statement 1n is the F-Singer property for a particular arithmetic hyperbolic
n-manifold of simplest type.
   As a consequence of the Mayer–Vietoris inequalities given in Corollary 9.4 we
get the following proposition.
Proposition 10.6. In all dimensions n we have
                                   2ďn ðñ 3ďn ,
and in even dimensions we have
                              3ă2d and 12d ðñ 3ď2d .
Proof. First, note that for a full subcomplex L of S n´1 , removing the vertices of
S n´1 that are not contained in L one at a time and applying Corollary 9.4(2) at
each step shows that
      ‚ if hPS n´1 satisﬁes upper F-Singer, and
      ‚ for full subcomplexes L1 of links in S n´1 , hPL1 satisﬁes upper F-Singer,
               HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                           47


then hPL does as well. In other words,
                                 3ăn and 2n ùñ 3ďn .
   Inductively, starting with the fact that 31 is true, this shows
                                     2ďn ùñ 3ďn .
The other direction is clear. This proves the ﬁrst part of the proposition.
   Now, look in even dimensions n “ 2d. Suppose 3ă2d is true, and observe two
things.
   First, if there is a counterexample L Ă S 2d´1 to 32d then there is a counterexam-
ple to 32d that is a p2d ´ 1q-simplex: If L is not a simplex, then it contains a vertex
v P L such that Stpvq is a proper subcomplex of L. Now, 3ă2d and Corollary 9.4(1)
implies that either Stpvq or L ´ v is a counterexample to 32d with fewer vertices.
Repeating this, we obtain a counterexample that is a simplex. Since 3ă2d is true,
the simplex must have dimension 2d ´ 1. Second, removing vertices from O∆2d´1
that are not contained in ∆2d´1 one at a time and applying Corollary 9.4(2) using
3ă2d at each step, we conclude that hP∆2d´1 satisﬁes upper F-Singer if hPO∆2d´1
does. Thus,
                                 3ă2d and 12d ùñ 32d .
   The converse is clear.                                                            
   Since hPO∆2d´1 is an arithmetic hyperbolic p2dq-manifold of simplest type, Corol-
lary 10.5 implies that if 12d does not hold, then there is an odd-dimensional arith-
metic hyperbolic manifold of simplest type that does not satisfy upper F-Singer.
Together with Agol’s ﬁbering theorem this implies:
Corollary 10.7. If there is a full subcomplex L in a flag triangulated sphere S m´1
such that β k phPL ; Fq ą 0 for some k ą m{2, then there is a closed n-manifold
either of the form hPS n´1 , or arithmetic hyperbolic of simplest type, that does not
satisfy the upper F-Singer property, for some odd n in the interval r5, ms.
Proofs of Theorems C(1) and A. Now we can prove the ﬁrst part of our main
theorem:
Theorem C(1). For any odd prime p, there is a closed, aspherical, n-manifold
Mn of dimension either n “ 5 or n “ 7 with special hyperbolic fundamental group
such that β k pM; Fp q ą 0 for some k.
Proof. Fix an odd prime p. Let pN, BN q be the compact aspherical 7-manifold
with boundary provided by Theorem 6.8. It has special hyperbolic fundamental
group and β 4 pN ; Fp q ą 0. Pick a ﬂag triangulation of the boundary B and let
M “ hPBN be the result of applying the hyperbolic reﬂection group trick using this
triangulation. We showed that this is a closed aspherical 7-manifold with virtually
special hyperbolic fundamental group.
   By Proposition 10.1, either this manifold has β 4 pM; Fp q ě β 4 pN ; Fp q ą 0, or
there is a full subcomplex L of a ﬂag triangulation of S 5 , such that β 4 phPL ; Fp q ą 0.
In the latter case, by Corollary 10.7, there is a closed aspherical 5-manifold H 5 with
virtually special hyperbolic fundamental group, which doesn’t have upper Fp -Singer
property. So, in summary, after passing to a special ﬁnite cover, we obtain a closed
aspherical manifold of dimension 7 (if it is M) or 5 (if it is H 5 ) with special
hyperbolic fundamental group and non-vanishing lower Fp homology growth (if it
48                GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


is M) or upper Fp -homology growth (if it is H 5 ). Therefore, Corollaries 4.1 and
4.4 imply Theorem C(1).                                                          
     Theorem 2.10 then immediately implies:
Theorem A. There exists a closed, odd-dimensional, aspherical manifold M with
special hyperbolic fundamental group that does not virtually fiber over a circle.
   One somewhat unsatisfying aspect of this line of argument is that it does not
say a given odd dimensional manifold does not virtually ﬁber, but only that there
is a such a manifold of a potentially lower odd dimension. The last section of the
paper is occupied with addressing this problem.

 11. Hyperbolic reflection group trick via barycentric subdivisions
   We have enough information from the skew ﬁeld approach to give—for large
primes p—explicit 7-dimensional, aspherical examples that do not satisfy Fp -Singer,
and also 7-dimensional Q-aspherical examples that do not satisfy Q-Singer.
   The tool for doing this is a version of the hyperbolic reﬂection group trick that
preserves Q-homology growth above the middle dimension, and also Fp -homology
growth above the middle dimension for large primes.
Theorem E (Better hyperbolic reﬂection group trick). For each dimension n there
is a choice of Charney–Davis piece CDn and a corresponding finite collection of
exceptional primes Sn , such that for any compact n-manifold with boundary pN, BN q
and any triangulation B which is a barycentric subdivision of a triangulation of the
boundary, the hyperbolic reflection group trick M “ hPBN satisfies the following
inequalities for k ą n{2:
          p2q          p2q
     (1) bk pN q ď bk pMq,
     (2) β k pN ; Qq ď β k pM; Qq and β k pN ; Qq ď β k pM; Qq,
     (3) β k pN ; Fp q ď β k pM; Fp q and β k pN ; Fp q ď β k pM; Fp q for p R Sn .
Proof. When the triangulation of BN is a barycentric subdivision of another tri-
angulation, i.e. B “ bT , then the vertex removal process in Proposition 10.1 can
be carried out by removing centers vσ of simplices σ of T , starting by removing
barycenters of all n ´ 1 simplices of T , then barycenters of all n ´ 2 simplices of
T , and so on. The links that appear in this process are precisely the barycentric
subdivisions of the boundaries of these simplices σ embedded as full subcomplexes
in the link of the vertex vσ in the ambient manifold B i.e.
                             bBσ i “ LkbT piq pvσi q Ă LkB pσ i q “ S n´2
where T piq is the i-skeleton of the triangulation T , and bT piq is its barycentric
subdivision, and σ i is some i-simplex.
   Note that the hPbBσ are hyperbolizations of a particular ﬁnite collection of man-
ifolds (they are called Tomei manifolds) of dimension ď n ´ 1. It follows from
the smooth hyperbolization technology of Ontaneda [65, Main Theorem] that for
any ǫ ą 0 we can pick an appropriate7 initial Charney–Davis piece CDn for which
all these manifolds will have smooth Riemannian metrics whose sectional curva-
ture is pinched between ´1 and ´1 ´ ǫ. When ǫ is suﬃciently small, a result of
   7The normal injectivity radius of all walls needs to be large, the existence of such a CD n is in
[65, Theorem 9.1].
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                        49


Donnelly–Xavier [25] implies that the even dimensional hPbBσ satisfy the Singer
conjecture while the odd dimensional hPbBσ satisfy it except possibly in the middle
two dimensions. Consequently for all these manifolds of dimension ď n ´ 1, we
have
                                 p2q
                               bąn{2 phPbBσ q “ 0,
We conclude by Corollaries 4.2 and 4.4 and virtual specialness of the π1 phPbBσ q that
for large primes p,
           β ąn{2 phPbBσ ; Fp q “ β ąn{2 phPbBσ ; Fp q “ β ąn{2 phPbBσ ; Qq “ 0.
  After cutting along the hPbBσ , we are left with copies of N and copies of hPbσ .
Each copy of N is a retract of M by Theorem D, and hPbBσ and hPbσ are quasi-
convex in M by Lemma 8.6. Hence the end result of the cutting procedure and
the components of hPbBσ are virtual retracts of M by Corollary 8.14. We apply
Corollary 9.5 to ﬁnish the proof of (2) and (3).
   For (1) we use an L2 -version of Corollary 9.7, which works for any fundamental
group.                                                                          
Theorem C (2). For large primes, there is a closed, aspherical, 7-manifold M7
with special hyperbolic fundamental group such that β k pM; Fp q ą 0 for some k.
Proof. Let N 7 be the seed manifold obtained form Theorem 6.8 for a prime p R S7 .
It has special hyperbolic fundamental group and β 4 pN ; Fp q ‰ 0, so applying the
hyperbolic reﬂection group trick with barycentrically subdivided boundary gives
a closed, aspherical 7-manifold M with virtually special hyperbolic fundamental
group and β 4 pM; Fp q ‰ 0. Passing to a ﬁnite cover, if necessary, gives such a
manifold M1 with special fundamental group and with β 4 pM1 ; Fp q ‰ 0.         
  Note that this proof avoids the inductive arguments of Section 10. We now prove
Theorem F.
Theorem F. There is a closed, rationally aspherical 7-manifold M with virtually
                                          p2q
special hyperbolic fundamental group and b4 pMq ‰ 0.
Proof. By Theorem 5.3 there is a ﬂag no-square triangulation of the 3-sphere. De-
note it by S 3 . By Corollary 5.2, if the ﬁnite groups used to deﬁne the graph product
GS 3 are large enough then β 4 pGS 3 ; Qq ą 0. Fix such a graph product GS 3 . Note
that it is virtually of ﬁnite type, and a virtual 4-dimensional duality group by The-
orem 5.5. Therefore, [5, Theorem 18] implies that there is a compact Q-aspherical
7-manifold with boundary pN 7 , Bq whose fundamental group is a ﬁnite index torsion-
free subgroup Γ ă GS 3 . Let M7 “ hPBN be the result of applying the hyperbolic
reﬂection group trick (with barycentric subdivisions) to this manifold. Then
           β 4 pM; Qq ě β 4 pN ; Qq “ β 4 pΓ; Qq “ rGS 3 : Γsβ 4 pGS 3 ; Qq ą 0,
where the ﬁrst inequality is Theorem E(1) and the ﬁrst equality follows because
the rational homology of Γ can be computed from the action on a Q-acyclic instead
of contractible complex. Finally, since the triangulation we picked was no-square,
the group GS 3 (and hence Γ) is hyperbolic and virtually special. So by Theorem
8, the fundamental group of M is hyperbolic and virtually special. In particular,
                                                         p2q
it is residually ﬁnite, so Lück approximation implies b4 pMq “ β 4 pM; Qq ą 0.
Replacing M by a ﬁnite cover if necessary, we obtain such a manifold with special
fundamental group.                                                              
50               GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


     Appendix I. Rational homology growth and L2 , qualitatively
   The connection between Q-Betti number growth and L2 rests on two pillars. The
ﬁrst is Kazhdan’s crucial observation that if the Q-Betti numbers grow fast in a
chain of regular ﬁnite covers converging to the universal cover, then the universal
cover has a non-vanishing L2 -harmonic cycle. The second is Lück’s converse to
Kazhdan’s criterion. Lück showed, by an ingenious approximation argument, that
L2 -harmonic cycles in the universal cover lead to fast Q-Betti number growth in
any chain of regular ﬁnite covers converging to it. He also obtained a quantitative
statement, showing that the analytically deﬁned L2 -Betti numbers agree with the
limit of the normalized Q-Betti numbers of any such chain [59].
   In this appendix we sketch qualitative versions of these two arguments, in order
to highlight the basic ideas behind them. The natural setting for these arguments
are not chains of regular ﬁnite covers, but covers of suﬃciently large universal8
injectivity radius.

Kazhdan’s criterion. We start with the following (obvious) linear algebraic lemma.
Lemma I.1. Any n-dimensional subspace of RN has a unit vector with a coordinate
of size ě n{N .
Proof. Let vi be an orthonormal basis for RN and P be the orthogonal projection
                                               řN
to the n-dimensional subspace. Its trace is n “ i“1 xP vi , vi y, so at least one of
vectors P vi has a coordinate of size ě n{N . The unit vector P vi {||P vi || has a
bigger coordinate.                                                                

   The Lemma implies that if the dimensions of spaces of harmonic cycles grow
linearly in the degree of the cover, then in each cover we can ﬁnd such cycles of
unit norm and uniformly bounded away from zero on some cell.
   Now, suppose we have a sequence of ﬁnite covers Xk Ñ X, each with a unit norm
harmonic cycle zk and a cell ek such that xzk , ek y ě c ą 0. Pick a subsequence so
that all the cells ek lie over the same cell e in X. Suppose, in addition, that the
covering map X   r Ñ Xk is injective on balls of radius k. Then, we have an isometry
of k-neighborhoods φ : Bk pr          ek q – Bk pek q, where the ﬁrst map is a covering
                             eq – Bk pr
translation and the second map is the projection X     r Ñ Xk . Using this isometry we
                  ´1
pick lifts zrk “ φ pzk q. They have L -norm “ 1 and satisfy xr
                                        2
                                                                   zk , ery “ xzk , ek y ě c.
The zrk may not be harmonic (in fact, they are just chains, not cycles), but since
zk is harmonic, this failure happens outside the pk ´ 1q-neighborhood of er. So, we
can pick a subsequence of zrk that converges to a harmonic cycle of L2 -norm ď 1
and non-vanishing at er. We have proved
Theorem I.2 (Kazhdan’s criterion [48]). Let X be a finite complex and Xk Ñ X
a sequence of finite covers whose universal injectivity radius goes to infinity. If the
ith -Betti number grows linearly, i.e.
                                            bi pXk ; Qq
                                  lim sup               ą 0,
                                      k     |Xk Ñ X|
                         r has an non-zero L2 harmonic i-cycle.
then the universal cover X

  8The universal injectivity radius is the smallest R such that the map from the universal cover
r Ñ X is injective on R-balls.
X
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                           51


Lück approximation. Lück proved a converse to Kazhdan’s criterion:
          ‚ L2 harmonic cycles on the universal cover produce linear Betti number
            growth.
The goal is to bound below the trace of the orthogonal projection to the kernel of
the Laplacian in covers, and Lück’s idea is to approximate the orthogonal projection
by polynomials in the combinatorial Laplacian, and exploit that this Laplacian is
a bounded operator with integer entries.
    Let X be a ﬁnite complex with fundamental group G “ π1 pXq and Xk Ñ X
a ﬁnite cover for which π : X    r Ñ Xk is injective on k-balls. Running our earlier
argument backwards, if there are L2 -harmonic cycles, then there is a i-cell er such
that, for the orthogonal projection Pr to the space of harmonic L2 chains we have
xPr er, ery ą c ą 0. Approximate Pr by a polynomial f p∆q       r in the combinatorial
               r
Laplacian ∆. Since it is a bounded operator, we can do this with f p0q “ 1 and
f ě 0 on the spectrum of r      ∆, so we also get xf p r  e, ery ě c. The advantage of
                                                        ∆qr
                    r                                  r
polynomials in ∆ over the orthogonal projection P is that f p∆qr    r e is a finite chain,
                                                                         r e, then all the
so if the injectivity radius k of Xk is greater than the diameter of f p∆qr
translates f p r ∆qγre embed isometrically in Xk . This implies xf p∆k qπpγr
                                                                           eq, πpγreqy ě c
for all γ P G. There are |Xk Ñ X| diﬀerent i-cells of the form πpγr             eq in Xk .
Summing over all of them, we get a lower bound for the normalized trace
                                    trpf p∆k qq
                                                ě c.
                                    |Xk Ñ X|
We are almost done. We just need to get back to the orthogonal projection Pk
in the ﬁnite cover. For this, one needs an estimate the number Nǫ,k of small but
nonzero eigenvalues (ď ǫ) of ∆k compared to the number of i-cells Nk in the cover.
This is given by another linear algebraic lemma, namely Lemma 2.3 in Section 2.
The ﬁnal important point is that—for a ﬁnite complex X—the norms of both the
combinatorial Laplacian in the universal cover and the combinatorial Laplacians
in all the ﬁnite covers are bounded by a single ﬁnite constant D (see [59, Lemma
2.5.]). Therefore, the upper bound on the normalized number of ǫ-small, nonzero
eigenvalues coming from Lemma 2.3 does not depend on the cover. From here it is
easy to see that the normalized trace of f p∆k q is close to the normalized trace of
the orthogonal projection Pk once f is close enough to the characteristic function
χ0 on the spectrum of ∆k .

                        Appendix II. Residual finiteness
   In this appendix, we show that if our seed manifold pN, BN q has residually ﬁnite
fundamental group then the output M of our hyperbolic reﬂection group trick has
residually ﬁnite fundamental group as well. In particular, we don’t need to assume
that π1 pN q is hyperbolic and virtually special. Along the way, we give a general
criterion for basic constructions of mirrored spaces to be residually ﬁnite.
Profinite topology. The proﬁnite topology on a group G has as a basis the
collection of cosets of ﬁnite index normal subgroups of G. Multiplication by a
group element and taking inverses induce continuous maps with this topology.
   A subset C of G is called separable if it is closed in the proﬁnite topology, i.e. for
any g P G ´ C there is a ﬁnite index normal subgroup N such that Cg ´1 X N “ H.
We will express this by saying g can be separated from C.
52              GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


    If H is a subgroup of G then separability is equivalent to the statement that H is
an intersection of ﬁnite index subgroups of G, i.e. for any g P G ´ H there is a ﬁnite
index subgroup N such that H Ă N and g R N . In particular, G is residually ﬁnite
if and only if t1u is separable (or, equivalently, the proﬁnite topology is Hausdorﬀ.)
    We shall need the following theorem, which combines work of Haglund–Wise [37]
and Minasyan [62].
Theorem II.1 ([37]+[62]). If G is a hyperbolic, virtually special group, then every
quasiconvex subgroup is separable. Furthermore, if H and K are two quasiconvex
subgroups, then the double coset HK is separable.
   Note that, since conjugation preserves quasiconvexity in hyperbolic groups [42,
Lemma 1.9], this theorem implies that the double cosets HgK are also separable
for each g P G.
   We shall also need the following easy lemma.
Lemma II.2. Suppose that G is a residually finite group, and H is a closed subset
of G in the profinite topology. Let Φ be a finite subset of G ´ H. Then there is a
finite index normal subgroup Γ ⊳ G such that Φ X HΓ “ H.
Proof. Since H is closed, for each ϕ P Φ the translate Hϕ´1 is closed and does not
contain the identity. Therefore, there is a ﬁnite index normal subgroup Γϕ such
     Hϕ´1 X Γϕ “ H. Since Γϕ is normal, Γϕ H “ HΓϕ , hence ϕ R HΓϕ . Taking
that Ş
Γ “ Φ Γϕ works.                                                                 
On residual finiteness of basic constructions. Recall from Section 7 that if
X is a mirrored complex, then the universal cover of X is also a mirrored complex.
The mirrors in the universal cover are precisely the path components of preimages
of mirrors in X. Let pW, Sq be the RACG corresponding to the mirrored complex
X, and pWĂ , Sq
             r the RACG corresponding to the universal cover.
Theorem II.3. Let X be a finite mirrored complex and W the associated right-
angled Coxeter group. Let Sr and W   Ă as above. Suppose G “ π1 pXq is residually
finite, and that all the double cosets Stabps̃q Stabpt̃q for s̃, t̃ P Sr are separable in G.
Then W Ă ¸ G is residually finite.

Proof. Let g P W  Ă ¸ G. If g maps nontrivially to G, then since G is residually ﬁnite
we can ﬁnd a ﬁnite quotient of G where g survives. So, we can assume that g P W           Ă.
                                               Ă            r      r
Write g as a product of generators of W , and let T Ă S denote the ﬁnite set of
generators appearing in the product. Hence g is contained in the ﬁnitely generated
special subgroup WTr .
    We claim that there is a ﬁnite index subgroup Γ of G which preserves disjointness
of the mirrors in this collection, i.e. if s̃, t̃ P Tr and s̃ X t̃ “ H then s̃ X γ t̃ “ H for
all γ P Γ.
    Since Tr is ﬁnite, it is enough to ﬁnd such a subgroup for each pair s̃, t̃ P Tr, then
we can take Γ to be the intersection of all these subgroups.
    So, suppose we have two disjoint mirrors s̃ and t̃. Since the stabilizer Stabps̃q acts
cocompactly on s̃, up to Stabps̃q-action there are at most ﬁnitely many G-translates
of t̃ which intersect s̃. Choose a ﬁnite set Φ Ă G of group elements representing
these translates.
    Note that Φ X Stabps̃q Stabpt̃q “ H, since if ϕ “ gs̃ gt̃ where gs̃ P Stabps̃q and
gt̃ P Stabpt̃q, then ϕt̃ “ gs̃ t̃, and gs̃ preserves disjointness between s̃ and t̃.
               HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                             53


  Since the double coset Stabps̃q Stabpt̃q is separable by assumption, Lemma II.2
implies that we can ﬁnd a ﬁnite index Γ ⊳ G so that
                               Φ X Stabps̃q Stabpt̃qΓ “ H.
Since Γ is normal, Stabps̃q Stabpt̃qΓ “ Stabps̃qΓ Stabpt̃q, and hence
                               Γ X Stabps̃qΦ Stabpt̃q “ H.
   We claim that s̃X γ t̃ “ H for each γ P Γ. Indeed, if γ t̃ intersects s̃, then γ t̃ “ gϕt̃
for some ϕ P Φ, and g P Stabps̃q. Therefore, ϕ´1 g ´1 γ P Stabpt̃q, so γ is contained
in the double coset Stabps̃qϕ Stabpt̃q.
   So, now we have a ﬁnite index normal subgroup Γ of G which preserves dis-
jointness of mirrors corresponding to generators in the ﬁnitely generated Coxeter
subgroup WTr . Let S be the set of Γ-orbits of elements of S.    r For s̄ ‰ t̄ P S deﬁne
ms̄t̄ “ 2 if there exist representatives of s̄ and t̄ which intersect, and set ms̄t̄ “ 8
otherwise. Let W be the corresponding ﬁnitely generated RACG.
   The natural quotient homomorphism W      Ă Ñ W is Γ-equivariant with respect to
the left action of Γ on WĂ and the trivial action on W . Therefore, it induces a map
Ă
W ¸ Γ Ñ W ˆ Γ. Composing with the projection onto the ﬁrst factor gives a map
Ă ¸ Γ Ñ W , which by construction is injective on W r , and in particular maps g
W                                                          T
nontrivially. Since W is a ﬁnitely generated RACG, it is residually ﬁnite, hence
we can detect the image of g in a ﬁnite quotient. This induces a ﬁnite quotient of
Ă ¸ Γ where g survives. Since W
W                                  Ă ¸ Γ is a ﬁnite index subgroup of W       Ă ¸ G, this
induces a ﬁnite quotient of W Ă ¸ G where g survives, so we are done.                     
Remark. If X has only one mirror Xs , then UpW, Xq is the double of X over Xs .
Therefore, this theorem can be seen as a generalization of the classical fact that the
double G ˚H G of a residually ﬁnite group over a separable subgroup is residually
ﬁnite.
Davis trick preserves residual finiteness. If W is inﬁnite, then π1 pUpW, Xqq
is inﬁnitely generated if X is not simply connected. In this case, a ﬁnite index
torsion-free subgroup Γ of W still acts properly and cocompactly on UpW, Xq, and
we can form the quotient Y “ UpW, Xq{Γ. If X is a compact aspherical manifold
with boundary and the Xs are dual cells to a ﬂag P L triangulation of BX, then Y
is a closed aspherical manifold. This construction of Y is called the Davis reflection
                                                                 Ă ¸π1 pXq. Explicitly,
group trick applied to X. In any case, π1 pY q is ﬁnite index in W
        Ă Ñ W as above, and set Γ
let π : W                          r “ π pΓq. Then Γ
                                           ´1             r is torsion-free, ﬁnite index
    Ă
in W , and stable under the action of π1 pXq. It turns out that π1 pY q is precisely
the semi-direct product Γr ¸ π1 pXq.
   Note that for the usual reﬂection group trick, the mirrors Xs are contractible,
so we get an immediate corollary:
Corollary II.4. Let X be a compact aspherical manifold with boundary with π1 pXq
residually finite. Then the fundamental group of any Davis reflection trick Y applied
to X is residually finite.
Hyperbolic reflection group trick preserves residual finiteness. Let L be
a ﬂag complex. We know from Theorem 8.3 that hKL has hyperbolic and virtually
special fundamental group (we’ll assume that hKL is connected, otherwise take the
component containing the cone vertex).
54                GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE




                                                                       Ă
             L̂                                                     hKL̂N
                                         r
                                         N




                                         N
                                                      hKLN




                   Figure 4. The space hKLN and its π1 pN q-cover.


   Now, let N be a simplicial complex containing L. Similarly to Section 8, let hKLN
be obtained from the hyperbolized cone hKL by removing a small enough ǫ-ball
centered at the cone vertex o and gluing in N . As in the proof of Theorem D(1),
hKLN retracts onto N , so its fundamental group splits as a semidirect product:
                                               Ă
                           π1 phKLN q “ π1 phKLN
                                               p q ¸ π1 pN q,

where Nr Ñ N is the universal cover of N and L     p Ñ L is the induced cover of L.
                 Ă
                 N                       r
Note that π1 phKLp q “ π1 phKLp q, since N is simply connected.
                 Ă                                                         p in Nr,
  The space hK N looks like a bunch of hyperbolic row-houses sitting on L
                   p
                   L
                                                                1
see Figure 4. Note that a cover N 1 Ñ N induces a cover hKLN1 Ñ hKLN of the same
degree.
Proposition II.5. Let N be a finite complex with residually finite fundamental
group and L Ă N a flag subcomplex. Let s, t be vertices of L, and let Hs and Ht
denote any conjugates of the fundamental groups of components of the hyperbolized
mirrors hpKs q and hpKt q respectively. Then we have:
    (1) π1 phKLN q is residually finite.
    (2) Hs , Ht and Hs Ht are separable subsets in π1 phKLN q.
Proof. We ﬁrst prove statement (1). Let γ P π1 phKLN q, γ ‰ 1. We want to sepa-
rate γ from 1 by a ﬁnite index subgroup. Let p : π1 phKLN q Ñ π1 pN q denote the
retraction. We have two cases:
   Case 1. γ R ker p. Then we can separate ppγq from 1 in π1 pN q, which is residually
ﬁnite, and take preimages.
   Case 2. γ P ker p.
                                                 Ă
   Then γ lifts to a nontrivial loop γ
                                     p in π1 phKLN
                                                 p q “ π1 phKLp q, which is contained
in a ﬁnite union of row houses. We think of this union as hKQ for a ﬁnite full
subcomplex Q of L. p Since π1 pN q is residually ﬁnite, we can choose a ﬁnite cover
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                           55


N 1 Ñ N , so that Q projects injectively onto a full subcomplex of the induced cover
L1 Ñ L.
                                             1
   Let γ 2 denote the image of γ
                               p in π1 phKLN1 q. Then we have a commutative diagram:
                       γ                                                γ1 ‰ 1
                           P
                                                                    Q
                                   π1 phKQ q           π1 phKL1 q


                       p
                       γ   P       π1 phKLp q

                                          Ă
                       p
                       γ   P       π1 phKLN
                                          p q



                                                                1
                                   π1 phKLN q   f.i.
                                                       π1 phKLN1 q
                                                                    Q
                               P
                       γ                                                 γ2
   By construction of Q the element γ  p is in the image of the top left vertical map, let
γ denote its preimage. The top horizontal map is injective since Q maps injectively
to a full subcomplex of L1 , therefore γ maps to a non-trivial element γ 1 in π1 phKL1 q.
By Theorem 8.3 π1 phKL1 q is virtually special, hence residually ﬁnite, so we can
separate γ 1 from 1. Since the diagram commutes, γ 1 is also the image of γ 2 under the
                                                                                        1
right vertical map, so taking preimages we get a ﬁnite index subgroup of π1 phKLN1 q
                                                1
separating γ 2 from 1. Finally, since π1 phKLN1 q is a ﬁnite index subgroup of π1 phKLN q
       2
and γ maps to γ under the bottom map, the same subgroup separates γ from 1 in
π1 phKLN q.
   For statement (2), we will only prove the statement for Hs , as the double coset
argument is identical. We have that Hs is contained in ker p and γ P π1 phKLN q´ Hs .
Again, we have two cases:
   If γ R ker p, then γ is separated from Hs by ker qp, where q is a ﬁnite quotient
of π1 pN q such that qpppγqq ‰ 1.
   So, we assume that γ P ker p. Since Hs is generated by ﬁnitely many loops, by
the same argument as above we have that Hs and γ are contained in π1 phKQ q for
some ﬁnite, full subcomplex Q of L, p Hence, Hs and γ map injectively with distinct
images to π1 phKL q for a certain ﬁnite cover L1 of L. The image of hpKs q is totally
                   1

geodesic in hKL1 , hence the image Hs1 of Hs is a quasiconvex subgroup of π1 phKL1 q.
By Theorem II.1 the image γ 1 can be separated from Hs1 (or from the image of a
double coset) by a ﬁnite index subgroup of π1 phKL1 q. This pulls back to a ﬁnite
                              1
index subgroup of π1 phKLN1 q which separates γ and Hs , and the same subgroup
separates γ from Hs in π1 phKLN q.                                                      
Proof of Theorem D(6). We now prove
Theorem D(6). Suppose N is a compact aspherical manifold with a flag trian-
gulation B of the boundary, and π1 pN q is residually finite. Let M be the result of
applying the hyperbolic reflection group trick. Then π1 pMq is residually finite.
Proof. The manifold M is a basic construction, where the seed manifold is hKBN ,
                            p0q
the Coxeter group is pZ{2q|B | , and for each s P B p0q , the s-mirror is hKLk s . By
56                GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


Proposition II.5 hKBN has residually ﬁnite fundamental group, and each component
of the mirrors has separable fundamental group inside of π1 phKBN q. The stabilizers
of components of lifts of mirrors in the universal cover of hKBN are conjugates of
these subgroups; therefore we can apply Theorem II.3 to conclude that π1 pMq is
residually ﬁnite.                                                                 

                  Appendix III. Embedding Octahedralizations
    Recall that the octahedralization OL of a ﬂag complex L is the complex which
has 2k`1 k-simplices v0˘ ˚ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˚ vk˘ for each k-simplex v0 ˚ Ť
                                                               ¨ ¨ ¨ ˚ vk of L. Alternatively,
it is the link of the special vertex in the Salvetti complex v0 ˚¨¨¨˚vk ĂL Sv10 ˆ¨ ¨ ¨ˆSv1k
of the right-angled Artin group AL . In this appendix, we will sketch an alternate
proof of the following result from [6], which is the main step in constructing low
dimensional thickenings of Salvetti complexes.
Theorem III.1 ([6]). If d ‰ 2 and L is a d-dimensional flag complex with bd pL; F2 q “
0, then OL piecewise linearly embeds in S 2d .
   From here, a “codimension three local unknotting” result of Akin [4] shows that
the triangulation of OL can be extended to a triangulation of the S 2d , and then
partially subdivided to obtain OL embedded inside a ﬂag triangulation of S 2d as a
full subcomplex. That is precisely the “if” direction of Theorem 6.5.
   The proof given here avoids conﬁguration spaces in favor of van Kampen’s earlier
(equivalent) approach to embedding obstructions, and clariﬁes the role that the
moment map immersion plays in [6], replacing it with a special class of immersions
of OL that are obtained from a generic, linear immersion of the underlying complex
L by a small linear perturbation.
Classical embedding theory (van Kampen + Whitney trick). Everywhere
in this section all maps are piecewise linear and we assume that d ‰ 2. (When
d “ 2 things are more subtle.)
   Let L be a d-dimensional complex. We want to determine whether it embeds in
R2d . To that end, start with a generic immersion f : L Ñ R2d , pick orientations on
all the d-simplices in L and look at the (signed) intersection numbers of images of
disjoint d-simplices σ and τ in L:
                                   Vf,σ,τ :“ f pσq X f pτ q.
This is called the intersection vector of f . The intersection vector is symmetric
when d is even and anti-symmetric when d is odd, i.e. Vf,σ,τ “ p´1qd Vf,τ,σ .
Proposition III.2 ([33, 49]). If Vf “ 0 then there is an embedding of L in R2d .
Proof idea. For disjoint d-simplices σ and τ , one cancels pairs of intersections with
opposite intersection numbers using the Whitney trick (this requires d ‰ 2). At
the end, one is only left with self intersections of f pσq and intersections between
adjacent simplices. It turns out that these can be cancelled as well (but this requires
extra arguments, see [49] and the erratum [50]9or [33]).                             
  So, we need ways to modify an immersion f so as to make the intersection vector
equal to zero.

     9For an annotated English translation, see https://sites.google.com/site/tutamnguyenphan/home-1
              HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                         57


Finger moves. We can push a d-simplex σ with a ﬁnger to make it go around a
pd ´ 1q-simplex e. In fact, we can do this to several pd ´ 1q-simplices or do it several
times to the same simplex. In general, a function assigning an integer to every
pd ´ 1q-simplex ρ : Cd´1 pLq Ñ Z speciﬁes a way to modify an immersion f on a
given d-simplex σ (while keeping it ﬁxed on all other simplices). Call the resulting
immersion fr. The eﬀect the modiﬁcation has on the intersection vector is given by
the following formula
                               Vfr,σ,τ “ Vf,σ,τ ` ρpBτ q.
If we interchange σ and τ then (anti)-symmetry of intersection vectors gives
                            Vfr,τ,σ “ Vf,σ,τ ` p´1qd ρpBτ q.
Finally, for a pair of simplices τ and τ 1 that are both diﬀerent from σ, the intersec-
tion vector is unaﬀected by a ﬁnger move applied to σ:
                                   Vfr,τ,τ 1 “ Vf,τ,τ 1 .
Note that ρpBτ q “ pδρqpτ q where δ is the coboundary operator in cohomology.
So, the above formulas hint at a close connection between embedding theory and
cohomology. In fact, a quick consequence is the following.
Proposition III.3. If H d pLq “ 0 then L embeds in R2d .
Proof. Fix a d-simplex σ1 in L and look at the function given by intersections with
the image of the simplex f pσ1 q X f p´q : Cd pLq Ñ Z. Since H d pLq “ 0 this function
is a coboundary, i.e. f pσ1 q X f p´q “ δρ for some ρ. Now, do the ﬁnger move
speciﬁed by ´ρ to σ1 to get a new immersion fr with
                                      $
                                      ’
                                      &0         if σ “ σ1 ,
(2)                        Vfr,σ,τ “ 0           if τ “ σ1 ,
                                      ’
                                      %
                                        Vf,σ,τ else.
Now repeat for all d-simplices of L to obtain an immersion with zero intersection
vector and apply the previous proposition.                                      

   The next proposition says that on the level of intersection vectors we can get
from any immersion to any other one via ﬁnger moves.
Proposition III.4 ([49]). For two immersions f and g there is a sequence of finger
moves which changes f to an immersion with the same intersection vector as g.
Proof idea. By general position, we can assume that f and g agree on the pd ´ 1q-
skeleton of L. Since we can move between any two such immersions by modifying
them one d-simplex at a time, it is enough to prove the proposition when f and
g only diﬀer on a single d-simplex σ. In that situation, there is a homotopy F :
L ˆ I Ñ R2d with F |Lˆ0 “ f and F |Lˆ1 “ g and F pp, tq a constant function of t
for any point p not in the interior of σ. Now, the ﬁnger move we need to do to σ is
given by looking at the intersection number F pσ ˆ Iq X f p´q : Cd´1 pLq Ñ Z.    

Example. The utilities graph
                         ř      K3,3 does not embed in the plane: Pick an immersion
f : K3,3 Ñ R2 for which f pσqX f pτ q “ 1 (mod 2), where the sum is taken over all
unordered, disjoint pairs of edges tσ, τ u. Note that this expression does not change
58                  GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


if we apply ﬁnger moves to f .10 Therefore, there is no immersion with vanishing
intersection vector.
An odd fact. The reason F2 is special in embedding theory is because we can
replace the immersion f by another immersion f 1 whose intersection vector is any
odd multiple of the original intersection vector:
Proposition III.5. p2k ` 1qVf “ Vf 1 for some immersion f 1 .
Proof. Let r : R2d Ñ R2d be a reﬂection. The immersion r ˝ f has intersection
vector Vr˝f “ ´Vf since changing the orientation of the ambient space changes the
sign of the intersection number. On the other hand, there is a sequence of ﬁnger
moves that takes the immersion r ˝ f to one with the same intersection vector as f .
Algebraically this sequence of ﬁnger moves takes ´Vf to Vf . Applying this sequence
of ﬁnger moves to f produces an immersion with intersection vector 3Vf . Applying
it to f k-times produces an immersion f 1 with intersection vector p2k ` 1qVf . 
Corollary III.6. If H d pLq is finite and of odd order, then L embeds in R2d .
Proof. Let 2k ` 1 “ |H d pLq| be the order of the cohomology group. By the odd
fact, we can choose an initial immersion f whose intersection vector is divisible by
2k ` 1. Then we have f pσ1 q X f p´q “ p2k ` 1qφ for some cocycle φ : Cd pLq Ñ Z,
which implies that f pσ1 q X f p´q is a coboundary, and we can proceed as in the
proof of Proposition III.3.                                                       
Some special generic immersions for octahedralizations. All this embedding
theory is very classical. It doesn’t directly help embed the octahedralization OL
because H d pOLq is never ﬁnite: The octahedralizations of top dimensional simplices
give inﬁnite order homology, and thus also cohomology, in the top dimension. The
extra idea we used in [6] was to start with an initial immersion f : OL Ñ S 2d that
is amenable to computation, namely the moment map speciﬁed by a particular11
ordering on OL. Re-examining the proof in [6], we discovered that all we used
was that it is a generic immersion with the following invariance property: Let
π : OL Ñ L be the projection map. Then, for any d-simplices σ, τ, and τ 1 such that
σ is disjoint from both τ and τ 1
(3)               f pσq X f pτ q “ f pσq X f pτ 1 q     whenever        πpτ q “ πpτ 1 q.
Given any such generic immersion, we can prove the ﬁrst main result of this Ap-
pendix.
Proof of Theorem III.1. The assumption bd pL; F2 q “ 0 implies that the top
cohomology of L is odd torsion, i.e. |H d pLq| “ 2k ` 1. Let π : OL Ñ L be the
projection map. Start with an immersion of L in S 2d whose intersection vector is
divisible by 2k`1 and perturb it to get an immersion f : OL Ñ S 2d . Its intersection
vector is divisible by 2k ` 1 and has the additional property (3).
   Look at a d-simplex σ1 of OL. Property (3) implies that
                                   f pσ1 q X f p´q : Cd pOLq Ñ Z
      10The reason is that the collection of edges disjoint from a given edge σ form a cycle.
    11One ﬁrst picks an ordering ă on L and then an ordering ă on OL for which the projection
π : OL Ñ L is an order-preserving map. The moment map immersion OL Ñ R2d is then deﬁned
on vertices by sending the i-th vertex in this ordering to pi, i2 , . . . , i2d q and extending linearly to
all of OL.
                 HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                                          59

                                                                 π             ϕ
factors through the projection to L as Cd pOLq Ñ Cd pLq Ñ Z. The map ϕ is
divisible by 2k ` 1 so, since |H d pLq| “ 2k ` 1, it is a coboundary (i.e φ “ δρ), and
thus f pσ1 q Y f p´q “ π ˚ ϕ is a coboundary, as well. Applying the ﬁnger move ´π ˚ ρ
to σ1 we obtain a new immersion fr whose intersection vector is given by (2). The
new immersion fr no longer satisﬁes property (3) for all σ in OL,12 but it does so
for all d-simplices σ projecting to πpσ1 q. (The key point here is that there is only
one d-simplex lying over π1 pσ1 q and disjoint from σ1 .) So, we can repeat the same
argument for all the d-simplices projecting to πpσ1 q to obtain a new immersion fˆ
with intersection vector
                                    $
                                    ’
                                    &0        if πpσq “ πpσ1 q,
                          Vfˆ,σ,τ “ 0         if πpτ q “ πpσ1 q,
                                    ’
                                    %
                                      Vf,σ,τ else.
The immersion fˆ does satisfy (3) for all d-simplices σ in OL, so we can repeat the
argument for all simplices of OL, obtain an immersion with zero intersection vector
and ﬁnally apply Proposition III.2 to get an embedding. This ﬁnishes the proof of
Theorem III.1.
2-dimensional octahedralizations. One might wonder if there is a more natural
way to embed OL in S 2d . Recently Tâm Nguyễn Phan and the ﬁrst author showed
that the d ‰ 2 restriction in Theorem III.1 cannot be removed.
Theorem III.7 ([8]). For a sufficiently fine flag triangulation of the 2-complex
D2 Y3 S 1 , the octahedralization OpD2 Y3 S 1 q does not P L embed in S 4 .
  This seems to be evidence against the existence of a more natural or canonical
embedding of OL in higher dimensions.
Immersions of OL via perturbation. The goal of the remainder of this appendix
is to show that we don’t really need orderings or the moment map to obtain a
generic immersion satisfying the invariance property (3). A small, generic, linear
perturbation of a generic linear immersion of L will do!
   Suppose L is linearly immersed in R2d . For each vertex v pick a vector Xv in
  2d
R . For a simplex σ and subset of its vertices A, we will denote by σǫA the linear
simplex in R2d obtained from the image of σ by moving each vertex v in A by the
vector ǫXv . Denote by σǫA the plane spanned by this simplex.
   The collection of vectors tXv u is a generic linear perturbation of L Ñ R2d if
for every pair of d-simplices σ and τ in L and partition containing their common
vertices                              ž
                             Lp0q Ą A   B Ą pσ X τ qp0q
there is an ǫ1 ą 0 such that for each 0 ă ǫ ď ǫ1 the following two conditions hold.
      ‚ σǫA and τǫB are d-planes that intersect in a single point pǫ , and
      ‚ pǫ does not lie on the boundaries of the simplicies: pǫ R BσǫA Y BτǫB .
In particular, for a pair of simplices σ and τ that are disjoint in L, this is saying
that their intersection in R2d is transverse.
   It is easy to see that generic linear perturbations of generic immersions exist,
and in fact form an open dense subset of all possible choices of vectors tXv u.
   12To see why, pick σ1 ‰ σ with πpσ1 q “ πpσ q and look at a simplex σ disjoint from both σ
                       1    1        1        1                                              1
and σ11 . Then frpσq X frpσ1 q “ 0 while frpσq X frpσ11 q “ f pσq X f pσ11 q “ f pσq X f pσ1 q may not be.
60                GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


      Genericity has several important consequences.
       (1) The intersections form a half-open linear interval prǫ1 ,0q (because everything
           deﬁning it is linear) converging to a point ps Ñ p0 P R2d . In other words,
           there is a vector W in R2d such that for 0 ă ǫ ď ǫ1 we   š have pǫ “ p0 ` ǫW .
           Next, pick a vertex v of τ that is not contained in A B and look at what
           happens to the intersection as we vary τǫB by moving the vertex v in the
           direction tXv . This varies the vector W linearly in t, i.e. we have for small
           enough t that
                       σǫA X τtvYǫB “ p0 ` ǫpW ` tV q “ pǫ ` ǫtV
           for some vector V which can be expressed inﬁnitesimally as
                                         1 dpσǫA X τtvYǫB q
                               V :“                         t“0
                                                                .
                                         ǫ        dt
           In particular, for small enough ǫ, the intersection between the planes spanned
           by σǫA and τǫpvYBq occurs at pǫ ` ǫ2 V .
       (2) There is linear isomorphism π : σǫA – σ that identiﬁes σǫA with σ and is
           bilipschitz, with bilipschitz constant tending to one as ǫ Ñ 0. The image
           πpprǫ1 ,0q q is a linear family in σ that does not meet Bσ, which implies there
           is a constant C 1 such that dpπppǫ q, Bσq ą C 1 ǫ for all 0 ă ǫ ď ǫ1 . The same
           statement holds with σǫA and σ replaced by τǫB and τ . Therefore, there is
           a positive constant C such that
(4)                              dppǫ , BσǫA Y BτǫB q ą Cǫ.
Now, let P :“ P       be the pd ` 1q-plane spanned by τǫB and τǫpvYBq , (or, equiv-
                    d`1

alently, by τǫB and Xv ). Parametrize P X σǫA as a line Lpsq with Lp0q “ pǫ and
Lp1q “ pǫ ` ǫ2 V . Note that
      ‚ for small enough ǫ it follows from (4) that Lp0q P σǫA if and only if Lp1q P
         σǫA .
   We will need an analogous statement involving τǫB and τǫpvYBq . To that end,
note that P has linear retractions
                                       r
                                       1     2r
                                  τǫB ÐÝ Pǫ ÝÑ τǫpvYBq
whose Lipschitz constants are uniformly bounded as ǫ Ñ 0 and which restrict to
inverse isomorphisms r2 |τǫB “ r1´1 |τǫpvYBq identifying τǫB with τǫpvYBq .
Lemma III.8. For small enough ǫ ą 0, we have Lp0q P τǫB if and only if Lp1q P
τǫpvYBq .
Proof. Note that pǫ “ Lp0q “ r1 pLp0qq and that dpr1 pLp0qq, r1 pLp1qqq ď |r1 ||V |ǫ2 .
Since |r1 ||V | is uniformly bounded independent of ǫ, (4) implies for small enough
ǫ that pǫ is in τǫB if and only if r1 pLp1qq is in τǫB . This happens if and only if
r2 r1 pLp1qq “ Lp1q is in τǫpvYBq . So, we are done.                               
Corollary III.9. For small enough ǫ ą 0, σǫA intersects τǫB if and only if σǫA
intersects τǫpBYvq . Moreover, the signs of the intersections are the same.
Proof. The bullet point and lemma above imply that for small enough ǫ we have
Lp0q P σǫA X τǫB if and only if Lp1q P σǫA X τǫpvYBq , which proves the ﬁrst part.
The second statement is clear because (for small enough ǫ and 0 ď t ď ǫ) the signed
intersection number σǫA X τtvYǫB is deﬁned and independent of t.                 
                HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                                    61


Proposition III.10 (Invariance property). Suppose f : L Ñ R2d is a generic linear
immersion. Then for any generic linear perturbation tXv u there is an ε ą 0 such
that the linear immersion fε : OL Ñ R2d defined on vertices by v ` ÞÑ f pvq, v ´ ÞÑ
f pvq ` ǫXv is generic and its signed intersection numbers satisfy
                                fǫ pσq X fǫ pτ q “ fǫ pσq X fǫ pτ 1 q
whenever σ, τ and τ 1 are d-simplices, τ and τ 1 are disjoint from σ and πpτ q “ πpτ 1 q.
Proof. Given σ, τ and τ 1 as in the statement š   of the proposition,
                                                                  š fǫ pσq “ σǫA ,
fǫ pτ q “ τǫB and fǫ pτ 1 q “ τǫB 1 for some A B Ą pσ X τ qp0q Ă A B 1 . Repeatedly
using the Corollary we conclude that for small enough ǫ there are equalities of
signed intersection numbers
                         σǫA X τǫB “ σǫA X τǫpBYB 1 q “ σǫA X τǫB 1
which proves the proposition.                                                                     

Remark. The embedding OL ãÑ S 2d produced by the methods of this appendix
appears quite exotic from a metric perspective, because it starts with an immersion
of OL obtained by perturbing an immersion of L. In this immersion, two vertices
v ` and v ´ that correspond to the positive and negative directions of the loop Sv1
are put very close together, as opposed to being antipodal in the sphere S 2d .

                                          References
 [1] M. Abert, N. Bergeron, M. Fraczyk, and D. Gaboriau, On homology torsion growth, to appear
     in J. Eur. Math. Soc. (2021), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2106.13051.pdf Ò4
 [2] I. Agol, Criteria for virtual fibering, J. Topol. 1 (2008), no. 2, 269–284. Ò4, 4
 [3] I. Agol, The virtual Haken conjecture, Doc. Math. 18 (2013), 1045–1087. With an appendix
     by Agol, Daniel Groves, and Jason Manning. Ò1, 8
 [4] E. Akin, Manifold phenomena in the theory of polyhedra, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 143 (1969),
     413–473. ÒIII
 [5] G. Avramidi, Rational manifold models for duality groups, Geom. Funct. Anal. 28 (2018),
     no. 4, 965–994. Ò1, 11
 [6] G. Avramidi, M. W. Davis, B. Okun, and K. Schreve, The action dimension of right-angled
     Artin groups, Bull. Lond. Math. Soc. 48 (2016), no. 1, 115–126. Ò1, 6, 6.5, III, III.1, III, III
 [7] G. Avramidi, B. Okun, and K. Schreve, Mod p and torsion homology growth in nonpositive
     curvature, Invent. Math. 226 (2021), no. 3, 711–723. Ò1, 1, 1, 1, 5, 9, 9
 [8] G. Avramidi and T. T. N. Phan, Fungible obstructions to embedding 2-complexes (2021),
     https://arxiv.org/pdf/2105.10984.pdf Ò1, III.7
 [9] L. Bartholdi, Amenability of groups is characterized by Myhill’s theorem, J. Eur. Math. Soc.
     (JEMS) 21 (2019), no. 10, 3191–3197. With an appendix by Dawid Kielak. Ò3
[10] I. Belegradek, Aspherical manifolds, relative hyperbolicity, simplicial volume and assembly
     maps, Algebr. Geom. Topol. 6 (2006), 1341–1354. Ò7
[11] I. Belegradek, Aspherical manifolds with relatively hyperbolic fundamental groups, Geom.
     Dedicata 129 (2007), 119–144. Ò7, 7
[12] M. Belolipetsky, N. Bogachev, A. Kolpakov, and L. Slavich, Subspace stabilisers in hyperbolic
     lattices (2021) Ò10
[13] N. Bergeron, F. Haglund, and D. T. Wise, Hyperplane sections in arithmetic hyperbolic
     manifolds, J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 83 (2011), no. 2, 431–448. Ò8, 8.1
[14] N. Bergeron, P. Linnell, W. Lück, and R. Sauer, On the growth of Betti numbers in p-adic
     analytic towers, Groups Geom. Dyn. 8 (2014), no. 2, 311–329. Ò1
[15] B. H. Bowditch, Relatively hyperbolic groups, Internat. J. Algebra Comput. 22 (2012), no. 3,
     1250016, 66. Ò7
[16] B. H. Bowditch, Cut points and canonical splittings of hyperbolic groups, Acta Math. 180
     (1998), no. 2, 145–186. Ò8.7
62                GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


[17] V. O. Bugaenko,
                  ?     Groups of automorphisms of unimodular hyperbolic quadratic forms over
     the ring Zrp 5 ` 1q{2s, Vestnik Moskov. Univ. Ser. I Mat. Mekh. 5 (1984), 6–12. Ò8
[18] R. M. Charney and M. W. Davis, Strict hyperbolization, Topology 34 (1995), no. 2, 329–350.
     Ò7, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3
[19] B. Clair and K. Whyte, Growth of Betti numbers, Topology 42 (2003), no. 5, 1125–1142. Ò2
[20] M. W. Davis, The geometry and topology of Coxeter groups, London Mathematical Society
     Monographs Series, vol. 32, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2008. Ò5, 5, 5, 5, 7
[21] M. W. Davis, J. Dymara, T. Januszkiewicz, J. Meier, and B. Okun, Compactly supported
     cohomology of buildings, Comment. Math. Helv. 85 (2010), no. 3, 551–582. Ò1
[22] M. W. Davis, J. Dymara, T. Januszkiewicz, and B. Okun, Weighted L2 -cohomology of Coxeter
     groups, Geom. Topol. 11 (2007), 47–138. Ò5
[23] M. W. Davis, T. Januszkiewicz, and S. Weinberger, Relative hyperbolization and aspherical
     bordisms: an addendum to “Hyperbolization of polyhedra”, J. Diﬀerential Geom. 58 (2001),
     no. 3, 535–541. Ò7, 7
[24] M. W. Davis and J. Meier, The topology at infinity of Coxeter groups and buildings, Comment.
     Math. Helv. 77 (2002), no. 4, 746–766. Ò1, 5.5
[25] H. Donnelly and F. Xavier, On the differential form spectrum of negatively curved Riemann-
     ian manifolds, Amer. J. Math. 106 (1984), no. 1, 169–185. Ò11
[26] C. G. A. Droms, Graph groups, Ph.D. Thesis, 1983. Thesis (Ph.D.)–Syracuse University. Ò3
[27] G. Duchamp and D. Krob, The lower central series of the free partially commutative group,
     Semigroup Forum 45 (1992), no. 3, 385–394. Ò3
[28] A. Eizenbud and A. I. Lichtman, On embedding of group rings of residually torsion free
     nilpotent groups into skew fields, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 299 (1987), no. 1, 373–386. Ò3, 3
[29] B. Farb, Relatively hyperbolic groups, Geom. Funct. Anal. 8 (1998), no. 5, 810–840. Ò7
[30] B. Farb and R. K. Dennis, Noncommutative algebra, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 144,
     Springer-Verlag, New York, 1993. Ò3
[31] S. P. Fisher, Improved algebraic fibrings (2021), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2112.00397.pdf Ò1,
     1, 3, 4, 4.3
[32] S. P. Fisher, S. Hughes, and I. J. Leary, Homological growth of Artin kernels in positive
     characteristic, Math. Ann. (2023/07/06). Ò3
[33] M. H. Freedman, V. S. Krushkal, and P. Teichner, van Kampen’s embedding obstruction is
     incomplete for 2-complexes in R4 , Math. Res. Lett. 1 (1994), no. 2, 167–176. ÒIII.2, III
[34] K. Fujiwara, An example of a closed 5-manifold of nonpositive curvature that fibers over a
     circle (2021), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2106.08549.pdf Ò1
[35] J. Gräter, Free division rings of fractions of crossed products of groups with Conradian left-
     orders, Forum Math. 32 (2020), no. 3, 739–772. Ò3
[36] D. Groves and J. F. Manning, Hyperbolic groups acting improperly, to appear in Geometry
     & Topology (2018), https://arxiv.org/pdf/1808.02325.pdf Ò8, 8.4
[37] F. Haglund and D. T. Wise, Special cube complexes, Geom. Funct. Anal. 17 (2008), no. 5,
     1551–1620. Ò1, 8, 8, 8.12, II, II.1
[38] F. Haglund and D. T. Wise, A combination theorem for special cube complexes, Ann. of Math.
     (2) 176 (2012), no. 3, 1427–1482. Ò8, 8.1, 10
[39] F. Henneke and D. Kielak, Agrarian and L2 -invariants, Fund. Math. 255 (2021), no. 3, 255–
     287. Ò1
[40] I. Hughes, Division rings of fractions for group rings, Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 23 (1970),
     181–188. Ò3
[41] G. Italiano, B. Martelli, and M. Migliorini, Hyperbolic 5-manifolds that fiber over S 1 , Inven-
     tiones mathematicae (2022/07/28). Ò1
[42] R. Gitik, On quasiconvex subgroups of negatively curved groups, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 119
     (1997), no. 2, 155–169. ÒII
[43] A. Jaikin-Zapirain, L2 -Betti numbers and their analogues in positive characteristic, Groups
     St Andrews 2017 in Birmingham, 2019, pp. 346–405. Ò1
[44] A. Jaikin-Zapirain, The universality of Hughes-free division rings, Selecta Math. (N.S.) 27
     (2021), no. 4, Paper No. 74, 33. Ò1, 3, 4
[45] A. Jaikin-Zapirain and M. Linton, On the coherence of one-relator groups and their group
     algebras (2023), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2303.05976.pdf Ò3
[46] T. Januszkiewicz and J. Świątkowski, Commensurability of graph products, Algebr. Geom.
     Topol. 1 (2001), 587–603 (electronic). Ò1, 6.2
                HOMOLOGY GROWTH, HYPERBOLIZATION, AND FIBERING                                     63


[47] T. Januszkiewicz and J. Świątkowski, Hyperbolic Coxeter groups of large dimension, Com-
     ment. Math. Helv. 78 (2003), no. 3, 555–583. Ò1, 5
[48] D. A. Kajdan, On arithmetic varieties, Lie groups and their representations (Proc. Summer
     School, Bolyai János Math. Soc., Budapest, 1971), 1975, pp. 151–217. ÒI.2
[49] E. R. van Kampen, Komplexe in euklidischen Räumen, Abh. Math. Sem. Univ. Hamburg 9
     (1933), no. 1, 72–78. ÒIII.2, III, III.4
[50] E. R. van Kampen, Berichtigung, Abh. Math. Sem. Univ. Hamburg 9 (1933), no. 1, 152–153.
     ÒIII
[51] D. Kielak, Residually finite rationally solvable groups and virtual fibring, J. Amer. Math. Soc.
     33 (2020), no. 2, 451–486. Ò1, 1
[52] P. H. Kropholler, P. A. Linnell, and J. A. Moody, Applications of a new K-theoretic theorem
     to soluble group rings, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 104 (1988), no. 3, 675–684. Ò3
[53] J.-F. Lafont and L. Ruﬀoni, Special cubulation of strict hyperbolization (2022),
     https://arxiv.org/pdf/2206.03620.pdf Ò8, 8
[54] A. I. Lichtman, On universal fields of fractions for free algebras, J. Algebra 231 (2000), no. 2,
     652–676. Ò3
[55] P. Linnell, W. Lück, and R. Sauer, The limit of Fp -Betti numbers of a tower of finite covers
     with amenable fundamental groups, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 139 (2011), no. 2, 421–434. Ò3,
     3.1, 3
[56] P. A. Linnell, Division rings and group von Neumann algebras, Forum Math. 5 (1993), no. 6,
     561–576. Ò1
[57] C. Loeh and M. Uschold, l2 -betti numbers and computability of reals (2022),
     https://arxiv.org/pdf/2202.03159.pdf Ò2
[58] A. Lubotzky, J. F. Manning, and H. Wilton, Generalized triangle groups, expanders, and a
     problem of Agol and Wise, Comment. Math. Helv. 94 (2019), no. 1, 53–66. Ò1
[59] W. Lück, Approximating L2 -invariants by their finite-dimensional analogues, Geom. Funct.
     Anal. 4 (1994), no. 4, 455–481. Ò2, 2.3, 2, 2, I, I
[60] W. Lück, L2 -Betti numbers of mapping tori and groups, Topology 33 (1994), no. 2, 203–214.
     Ò2
[61] J. Meier, When is the graph product of hyperbolic groups hyperbolic?, Geom. Dedicata 61
     (1996), no. 1, 29–41. Ò5
[62] A. Minasyan, Separable subsets of GFERF negatively curved groups, J. Algebra 304 (2006),
     no. 2, 1090–1100. ÒII, II.1
[63] B. Okun and K. Schreve, The L2 -(co)homology of groups with hierarchies, Algebr. Geom.
     Topol. 16 (2016), no. 5, 2549–2569. Ò1
[64] D.       W.        Morris,        Introduction      to      arithmetic       groups      (2015),
     https://arxiv.org/pdf/math/0106063.pdf Ò10
[65] P. Ontaneda, Riemannian hyperbolization, Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. 131 (2020),
     1–72. Ò11, 7
[66] D. Osajda, A construction of hyperbolic Coxeter groups, Comment. Math. Helv. 88 (2013),
     no. 2, 353–367. Ò1, 5, 5
[67] D. S. Passman, Universal fields of fractions for polycyclic group algebras, Glasgow Math. J.
     23 (1982), no. 2, 103–113. Ò3
[68] D. S. Passman, The algebraic structure of group rings, Pure and Applied Mathematics, Wiley-
     Interscience [John Wiley & Sons], New York-London-Sydney, 1977. Ò3, 3
[69] P. Przytycki and J. Świątkowski, Flag-no-square triangulations and Gromov boundaries in
     dimension 3, Groups Geom. Dyn. 3 (2009), no. 3, 453–468. Ò1, 1, 5.3
[70] L. C. Siebenmann, The obstruction to finding a boundary for an open manifold of dimension
     greater than five, Ph.D. Thesis, 1965. Ò6, 6
[71] J.-C. Sikorav, Fibered cohomology classes in dimension three, twisted Alexander polynomials
     and Novikov homology, Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble) 73 (2023), no. 1, 279–306. Ò3
[72] P. F. Smith, Localization and the AR property, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 22 (1971), 39–68.  Ò3
[73] È. B. Vinberg (ed.), Geometry. II, Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences, vol. 29, Springer-
     Verlag, Berlin, 1993. Ò10
[74] A. Żuk, Property (T) and Kazhdan constants for discrete groups, Geom. Funct. Anal. 13
     (2003), no. 3, 643–670. Ò1
64              GRIGORI AVRAMIDI, BORIS OKUN, AND KEVIN SCHREVE


     Max Planck Institute for Mathematics, Bonn, Germany, 53111
     Email address: gavramidi@mpim-bonn.mpg.de

  Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee, Mil-
waukee, WI 53201
  Email address: okun@uwm.edu

  Department of Mathematics, Louisiana State University, Lockett Hall, Baton
Rouge, LA 70806
  Email address: kschreve@lsu.edu
