     ANNALES
                         DE LA FACULTÉ
                          DES SCIENCES



   Mathématiques
ROBERT J. B ERMAN , B O B ERNDTSSON
Real Monge-Ampère equations and Kähler-Ricci solitons on toric log Fano
varieties
Tome XXII, no 4 (2013), p. 649-711.
<http://afst.cedram.org/item?id=AFST_2013_6_22_4_649_0>



      © Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, 2013, tous droits réservés.
      L’accès aux articles de la revue « Annales de la faculté des sci-
      ences de Toulouse Mathématiques » (http://afst.cedram.org/), implique
      l’accord avec les conditions générales d’utilisation (http://afst.cedram.
      org/legal/). Toute reproduction en tout ou partie de cet article sous quelque
      forme que ce soit pour tout usage autre que l’utilisation à fin strictement
      personnelle du copiste est constitutive d’une infraction pénale. Toute copie
      ou impression de ce fichier doit contenir la présente mention de copyright.



                                    cedram
                         Article mis en ligne dans le cadre du
            Centre de diffusion des revues académiques de mathématiques
                              http://www.cedram.org/
   Annales de la Faculté des Sciences de Toulouse                    Vol. XXII, n◦ 4, 2013
                                                                               pp. 649–711




    Real Monge-Ampère equations and Kähler-Ricci
          solitons on toric log Fano varieties
                   Robert J. Berman, Bo Berndtsson(1)




       ABSTRACT. — We show, using a direct variational approach, that the
       second boundary value problem for the Monge-Ampère equation in Rn
       with exponential non-linearity and target a convex body P is solvable iﬀ 0
       is the barycenter of P. Combined with some toric geometry this conﬁrms,
       in particular, the (generalized) Yau-Tian-Donaldson conjecture for toric
       log Fano varieties (X, ∆) saying that (X, ∆) admits a (singular) Kähler-
       Einstein metric iﬀ it is K-stable in the algebro-geometric sense. We thus
       obtain a new proof and extend to the log Fano setting the seminal result
       of Wang-Zhou concerning the case when X is smooth and ∆ is trivial.
       Li’s toric formula for the greatest lower bound on the Ricci curvature
       is also generalized. More generally, we obtain Kähler-Ricci solitons on
       any log Fano variety and show that they appear as the large time limit
       of the Kähler-Ricci ﬂow. Furthermore, using duality, we also conﬁrm a
       conjecture of Donaldson concerning solutions to Abreu’s boundary value
       problem on the convex body P in the case of a given canonical measure
       on the boundary of P.

       RÉSUMÉ. — Nous montrons, grâce à une approche variationnelle di-
       recte, que le deuxième problème avec valeurs au bord pour l’équation
       de Monge-Ampère dans Rn avec non-linéarité exponentielle, et ensem-
       ble cible un corps convexe P , admet une solution si et seulement si 0
       est le barycentre de P . En combinant ce résultat avec de la géométrie
       torique, on obtient en particulier conﬁrmation de la conjecture de Yau-
       Tian-Donaldson (généralisée) pour les variétés toriques log-Fano (X, ∆) ;
       à savoir que (X, ∆) admet une une métrique de Kähler-Einstein (sin-
       gulière) si et seulement si elle est K-stable au sens algébro-géométrique.
       Nous obtenons donc une nouvelle démonstration, qui s’étend au cas log-
       Fano, du résultat fondateur de Wang-Zhou qui concerne le cas où X est
       lisse et ∆ est trivial. Nous généralisons également la formule torique de Li
       pour la borne inférieure de la courbure de Ricci. Plus généralement, nous



  (1) Mathematical Sciences – Chalmers University of Technology and University of

Gothenburg – SE-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden
robertb@chalmers.se, bob@chalmers.se

                                         – 649 –
                           Robert J. Berman, Bo Berndtsson


       obtenons des solitons de Kähler-Ricci sur toute variété (singulière) log-
       Fano, et montrons qu’ils apparaissent comme la limite en temps grand du
       ﬂot de Kähler-Ricci. De plus, en utilisant la dualité, nous conﬁrmons aussi
       une conjecture de Donaldson sur les solutions du problème de valeurs au
       bord d’Abreu sur le corps convexe P dans le cas d’une mesure canonique
       donnée sur la frontière de P .




Contents
   1     Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 650
   2     Monge-Ampère equations in Rn and Convex bodies . 659
   3     Toric log Fano varieties, polytopes and Kähler-Ricci
         solitons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 680
   4     K-energy type functionals and K-stablity . . . . . . . . 694
   5     Convergence of the Kähler-Ricci ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . 704
   6     Appendix: proof of Lemma 2.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 707
         Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 709




                                  1. Introduction

1.1. Monge-Ampère equations in Rn

     Let us start by recalling the setting for the second boundary value prob-
lem for the real Monge-Ampère operator in the entire space Rn [4]. A convex
function φ on Rn is said to be a (classical) solution for the latter problem
if it is smooth and satisﬁes the following two conditions:

                                       ∂2φ
                           (i) det(           ) = F (φ, dφ),
                                      ∂xi ∂xj

where F is a given positive smooth function on Rn+1 and

                                   (ii) dφ(Rn ) = Ω

where Ω is a (necessarily convex) given domain in Rn . We will be concerned
with the case when the domain Ω is bounded, i.e. its closure P := Ω̄ is a
convex body and
                            F (t, p) = e−γt g(p)−1

                                        – 650 –
 Real Monge-Ampère equations and Kähler-Ricci solitons on toric log Fano varieties


for γ ∈ R, where g is a positive smooth function on Rn . After a trivial
scaling we may as well assume that γ = ±1. As is well-known, the positive
case is, by far, most challenging one and the equation does then usually
not admit any solutions. Our main result gives the general structure of the
solutions:
  Theorem 1.1. — Let P be a convex body containing 0 in its interior.
Then there is a smooth convex function φ such that
                                         ∂2φ
                           g(dφ) det(           ) = e−φ
                                        ∂xi ∂xj
and such that its gradient induces a diﬀeomorphism
                               dφ : Rn → int (P )
iﬀ 0 is the barycenter for the measure g(p)dp on P.

   Moreover, φ is then uniquely determined up to the action of the additive
group Rn by translations and
    • φ(x) − supp∈P x, p is globally bounded on Rn
    • the Legendre transform φ∗ of φ is Hölder continuous up to the bound-
      ary of P for any Hölder exponent in [0, 1[.
  The proof uses a variational approach to construct a solution φ as a
maximizer of the functional
                                          
                    G(φ) := log   e−φ dx −   φ∗ gdp
                                     Rn              P
on the space of all convex functions whose gradient image is P. The main
point of the argument is to establish a direct coercivity estimate for the
latter functional of independent interest, which can be seen as a reﬁned
Moser-Trudinger type inequality (see Theorem 2.16). In fact, the argument
shows that any asymptotically minimizing sequence of the functional above
converges – up to normalization – to a solution φ as in the previous theorem.
This extra ﬂexibility will be used when establishing the convergence of the
Kähler-Ricci ﬂow below.

1.2. Toric Kähler-Einstein geometry

   We will mainly focus on the case when
                                   g(p) = ea,p
for a given vector a ∈ Rn . The main diﬀerential-geometrical motivation
comes from the study of Kähler-Einstein metrics or more generally Kähler-
Ricci solitons on toric varieties.

                                     – 651 –
                        Robert J. Berman, Bo Berndtsson


1.2.1. Kähler-Einstein metrics

    Recall that a Kähler form ω on a compact complex manifold X is a
closed positive two-form, which equivalently means that, locally,

                                         ¯
