                                               BOREL ACTIONS IN NONPOSITIVELY CURVED GEOMETRY AND THE NIELSEN
                                                                    REALISATION PROBLEM


                                                                                          CHRISTIAN KREMER




arXiv:2510.21550v1 [math.GT] 24 Oct 2025
                                                     Abstract. In this note, we record the proof of a theorem about the coincidence of genuine and ho-
                                                     motopy fixed points for isometric group actions on complete Riemannian manifolds with nonpositive
                                                     sectional curvature, and more generally, certain quotients of universal spaces for families. The result is
                                                     put into context with the Nielsen realisation problem for aspherical manifolds, and we give a unifying
                                                     account of different formulations of that problem, made possible by the same methods.



                                                                                                   Contents
                                              1. Introduction                                                                                                     1
                                              2. Quotients of universal spaces for families                                                                       4
                                              3. Actions in nonpositive curvature                                                                                 6
                                              References                                                                                                          7




                                                                                              1. Introduction
                                              Let M be a complete Riemannian manifold with nonpositive sectional curvature. Assume the finite
                                           group G acts on M via isometries. For each subgroup H ⊂ G, the fixed submanifold M H ⊂ M is
                                           an embedded submanifold, which in fact inherits a Riemannian metric with nonpositive sectional
                                           curvature as well. This submanifold will be referred to as the genuine H-fixed points of the action.
                                           This article is about the following homotopical property of such actions, comparing the genuine fixed
                                           points of M to the homotopy fixed points.

                                           Theorem 1.1. If M is a complete Riemannian manifold with nonpositive sectional curvature and an
                                           isometric action by a finite group G, then for each H ≤ G the canonical map
                                                                                                 M H → M hH
                                           from the genuine H-fixed points of M to the homotopy H-fixed points, is an equivalence.

                                               Recall that a G-space X is a Borel G-space if for each H ≤ G the map X H → X hH is an equiv-
                                           alence. So §1.1 predicts that nonpositively curved manifolds with isometric G-action are Borel G-
                                           spaces. In this note, we record a proof of §1.1 in terms of genuine equivariant homotopy theory, de-
                                           pending on the Cartan-Hadamard theorem from differential geometry as geometric input. The proof
                                           is achieved by translating - using said theorem from geometry - to a result about certain quotients of
                                           universal spaces for families. That result is §1.3, and should in fact be viewed as the main mathemat-
                                           ical content of this note. We briefly explain §1.3 and put it into context with the Nielsen realisation
                                           problem after that.

                                              Date: October 27, 2025.
                                                                                                         1
             BOREL ACTIONS IN NONPOSITIVELY CURVED GEOMETRY AND THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM                             2


    Recall that for a discrete group Γ, a family of subgroups is a collection F of subgroups closed under
conjugation and passing to subgroups. Given such a family F, a universal Γ-space for the family F is
a Γ-space EF Γ with the property that for each subgroup H ≤ Γ one has
                                                   (
                                                      ∗ : if H ∈ F ;
(1)                                          H
                                      (EF Γ) ≃
                                                      ∅ : if H ∈
                                                               / F.
A particularly important example of a family for this note is the family Fin of finite subgroups of a
discrete group Γ, because of the following simple consequence of the Cartan-Hadaramard theorem.

Observation 1.2 (Proved as §3.3). Let M be a connected closed Riemannian manifold with nonpositive
sectional curvature with an isometric G-action. For some choice of base point x ∈ M , let π =
π1 (M, x) and Γ = π1 (MhG , x). Then there is a G-homotopy equivalence
(2)                                                  M ≃ π\EFin Γ.

   In §1.2, we note that the map M → MhG lets us view π as a normal subgroup of Γ with G = Γ/π,
so we can view the quotient π\EFin Γ as a G-space with its residual action. Using §1.2, we can deduce
§1.1 from the following purely homotopy theoretic statement.

Theorem 1.3. Let Γ be a discrete group, let π ≤ Γ be a normal subgroup, and F the family of subgroups
K ⊂ Γ such that K ≤ Γ → Γ/π is injective. Then, for each H ≤ G, the map
                                             (π\EF Γ)H → (π\EF Γ)hH
is an equivalence.

Proof of §1.1 assuming §1.3 and §1.2. We apply §1.3 for the family of finite subgroups of the group Γ
from §1.2. Since π1 (M ) is torsion free [Lee18, Cor. 12.18], the finite subgroups of Γ are precisely
those F ⊂ Γ such that F ⊂ Γ → Γ/π1 (M ) ≃ G is injective. So indeed, M ≃ π1 (M )\EFin Γ is a
Borel G-space.                                                                                     □
Relevance for the Nielsen realisation problem. The Nielsen realisation problem for aspherical
manifolds1 asks if homotopical group actions on aspherical manifolds, in a sense to be made precise
below, can be rigidified to actual group actions. Nielsen originally asked if for a finite subgroup
G of the mapping class group Mod(Σ) of a closed oriented surface Σ, each element of G admits
a representative homeomorphism, which jointly assemble to an actual G-action on M . A positive
answer was ultimately given by Kerckhoff [Ker83]. The map Mod(Σ) → π0 hAut(Σ) to the group of
homotopy classes of homotopy automorphisms is an isomorphism, so one may indeed view this as a
way of rigidifying a homotopical group action.
   The latter perspective can be generalised to general aspherical manifolds - can a group homomor-
phism G → π0 hAut(M ) be rigidified to an actual group action? This question has received quite a bit
of attention in the literature [DL24; Wei23]. If the centre of π1 (M ) is not trivial, its formulation is not
yet quite optimal, and we recall some homotopy theory of aspherical spaces to give a slightly better
formulation. For a general aspherical space X, its space of homotopy automorphisms hAut(X) has
the homotopy groups
                                             
                                             Out(π1 (X)) : for i = 0;
                                             
                                             
(3)                                πi hAut(X) =        C(π1 (X))            : for i = 1;
                                                      
                                                                            : for i ≥ 2.
                                                      
                                                      0

   1For the purposes of this article, we follow the convention that an aspherical space is a connected space with contractible

universal cover, and an aspherical manifold is a closed connected manifold with contractible universal cover.
               BOREL ACTIONS IN NONPOSITIVELY CURVED GEOMETRY AND THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM                          3


Here Out(π1 (M )) is the group of outer automorphisms of π1 (M ), the quotient Aut(π1 (M ))/G,
where G acts on itself by conjugation, and C(π1 (X)) is the centre of π1 (X).
   In [RS77], Raymond-Scott observe that if G → π0 hAut(M ) lifts to a group action on M , one
can in particular construct the fibre sequence of aspherical spaces2 M → MhG → BG. The outer
automorphism of π1 (M ) induced by fibre transport along g ∈ π1 (BG) = G is induced by conjugating
with any lift of g in π1 (MhG ) and noting that this automorphism preserves the subgroup π1 (M ) ≤
π1 (MhG ).
   By the straightening-unstraightening equivalence, constructing such a fibre sequence is the same
as finding a lift in the following diagram of E1 -groups in the category of spaces.

                                                              hAut(M )
(4)

                                                G           π0 hAut(M )

Raymond-Scott observe that if C(π1 (M )) is nontrivial, such a lift need not exist, and in fact give
explicit aspherical manifolds for which it does not. It seems to make sense to view Raymond-Scott’s
objection as a reason to change the formulation of the Nielsen realisation problem to the following.

Question 1.4 (The Nielsen realisation problem). Let G be a finite group, M an aspherical manifold
and consider a map of E1 -groups G → hAut(M ). Does it refine to a G-action on M ?3

   For brevity, we will refer to a map of E1 -groups G → hAut(M ) as a homotopical G-action. There
are numerous known cases in which the Nielsen realisation problem holds true, and we review two
of them with connection to negative curvature.
       (1) If M = Σg is an oriented surface of genus g ≥ 2, then there exists a hyperbolic metric on M
           so that the homotopical action by G refines to an action by isometries [Ker83].
       (2) If M is a closed hyperbolic manifold of dimension d ≥ 3, then the isometry group of M is a
           finite group and the map Isom(M ) → hAut(M ) is an equivalence, by Mostow rigidity.
Note that in both cases, §1.1 applies. This is good news, since it means that for each subgroup H ≤ G,
the homotopy type of the fixed point space M H is aleady determined by the map of E1 -groups G →
hAut(M ), since they are equivalent to the homotopy fixed points M hH . This makes it reasonable to
ask the following variant of the Nielsen realisation problem.

Question 1.5 (Borel version of the Nielsen realisation problem). Let G be a finite group, M an as-
pherical manifold and G → hAut(M ) a map of E1 -groups. Does it refine to a Borel G-action on
M?

    Essentially since the spaces M hH are determined by the homotopical group action of G on M , we
note that this formulation of the Nielsen realisation problem is about the existence of a group action
giving rise to a specific G-homotopy type, the Borelification Bor(M ). Here the Borelification of a
space X with a homotopical G-action is the G-space Bor(X) with X H = X hH , which is constructed
using the right adjoint to the forgetful functor AnG → AnBG . While it seems like a harder problem
to construct a Borel G-action on M as opposed to an arbitrary one, in practice it is convenient that
it gives a genuine G-homotopy type to work with. In fact, all solutions to §1.4 known to the author
even solve §1.5. Note that through §1.3, §1.5 is closely related to the following question.

      2They construct a short exact sequence of groups, which amounts to the same datum under the Bar construction B(−).
  3To avoid confusion, we remark that this is not the same as finding a lift along the map of E -groups Homeo(M ) →
                                                                                               1
hAut(M ), unless Homeo(M ) is equipped with the discrete topology.
           BOREL ACTIONS IN NONPOSITIVELY CURVED GEOMETRY AND THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM            4


Question 1.6 (Manifold models for universal spaces). Let Γ be a discrete group which admits a sub-
group π ≤ Γ of finite index, which is a Poincaré duality group. Is there a cocompact Γ-manifold N
which, as Γ-space is equivalent to EFin Γ?

   To pass between §1.5 and §1.6 one either passes to a π-cover or takes the quotient by the π-action.
Uniqueness up to Γ-homeomorphism of manifold models for EFin Γ is what is often referred to as the
equivariant Borel conjecture, adding a second layer of reasoning to calling §1.5 the Borel version of
§1.4.
   We warn the reader that §1.5 and §1.4 are known to be false in full generality [BW08], but widely
open if one focuses on groups G of odd order. The mechanism by which it fails for the group C2 is
rather well understood and has to do with the L-theory of group rings of the infinite dihedral group,
and under the absence of 2-torsion this mechanism will not make an appearance, see [DL24, Thm.
7.2.(2)] for an instance of this.

Relation to other work. The content of this note is, in one formulation or another, known to experts
on the Nielsen realisation problem, although we are not aware of a written record. Having been asked
questions about the relation of §1.4 and §1.6 several times, we write it to have a unifying and clarifying
account of the homotopy theoretic basics of the Nielsen realisation problem, relevant to the author’s
ongoing collaborations on that topic [HKK24; KK].

Conventions. We work in the setting of ∞-categories as developed by Joyal, Lurie and many others.
The term category will refer to a an ∞-category. We write An for the category of spaces. As justified
by Elmendorf’s theorem, for a (discrete) group Γ we define the category AnΓ of Γ-spaces as the
category of An-valued presheaves on the orbit category O(Γ).

Acknowledgements. The author expresses gratitude to Andrea Bianchi, Emma Brink, Wolfgang
Lück and Shmuel Weinberger for helpful conversations around this note.

                          2. Quotients of universal spaces for families
   The purpose of this section is to prove §1.3 about the equivariant homotopy theory of spaces of
the form π\EF Γ.

Definition 2.1. Let Asph ⊂ An denote the full subcategory of aspherical spaces. Further, write
Asphinj ,→ Asph for the wide subcategory on maps that induce injections on fundamental groups
for arbitrary choices of basepoints.

Construction 2.2. If Γ is a discrete group, and Γ/H ∈ O(Γ) a transitive Γ-set, then its transport
groupoid Trans(Γ/H) := (Γ/H)hΓ , defined as the homotopy orbits by the Γ-action, is an aspherical
space, which identifies with BH. The Γ-equivariant map Γ/H → Γ/Γ induces a map Trans(Γ/H) →
Trans(Γ/Γ) ≃ BΓ. So, applying Trans upgrades to a functor
                                    ≃
(5)                             → Asphinj,F
              Trans/BΓ : OF (Γ) −     /BΓ ,          G/H 7→ [(Γ/H)hG = BH → BΓ].

Notation 2.3. If F is a family of subgroups of the discrete group Γ, we will write Asphinj,F
                                                                                          /BΓ for the
full subcategory on those f : X → BΓ, for which the image of π1 (X, x) ⊂ π1 (BΓ, f (x)) ∼ = Γ is in F,
where the last equivalence is given by conjugation with some path in BΓ from f (x) to the basepoint.
Note that this does not depend on the choice of base point, since families are by definition invariant
under conjugation.

Observation 2.4. For every family F of subgroups of Γ, the functor Trans/BΓ from (5) induces an
                                  ∼
equivalence of categories OF (Γ) −→ Asphinj,Γ
                                          /BΓ . This is a simple consequence of covering theory:
            BOREL ACTIONS IN NONPOSITIVELY CURVED GEOMETRY AND THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM        5


the category Asphinj
                   /BΓ is by definition the category of connected coverings of BΓ, so the functor
Trans/BΓ gives an equivalence to the category of transitive Γ-sets. An explicit inverse sends p : X →
BΓ to the fibre over ∗ ∈ BΓ. It is easy to see that this equivalence respects families as claimed.

Lemma 2.5. Consider an extension of groups

                                         1→π→Γ→G→1

and write F for the family of subgroups F ⊂ Γ such that the composite F ⊂ Γ → G is injective. Then
the diagram
                                                   Trans/BΓ
                                       Asphinj,F
                                           /BΓ                An/BΓ


                                                 Trans/BG
                                       Asphinj
                                           /BG             An/BG

where the vertical maps are induced by postcomposition with BΓ → BG, is cartesian.

Proof. Both horizontal functors are inclusions of full subcategories. We have to show that X → BΓ ∈
An/BΓ is an object of Asphinj,F                                                      inj
                             /BΓ if and only if X → BΓ → BG is an object of Asph/BG . Asphericity
of X is of course necessary in both situations, so the claim is that π1 (X) → π1 (BΓ) is injective with
image in F if and only if π1 (X) → π1 (BΓ) → π1 (BG) is injective, which is exactly the definition of
the family F.                                                                                        □

Lemma 2.6. Let X ∈ AnBG be a space with G-action. Then the diagram
                                               Bor
                                      AnBG
                                        /X             (AnG )/Bor(X)


                                                 Bor
                                      AnBG                 AnG
is cartesian.

Proof. Since Bor : AnBG → AnG is fully faithful, both horizontal functors are fully faithful. Now
Z → Bor(X) lies in the image of the upper horizontal map if and only if Z is in the image of the
lower horizontal map, establishing the claim.                                                   □

Observation 2.7. In an extension of groups

                                         1→π→Γ→G→1

note that Bπ attains a G-action. Indeed, the object BΓ → BG ∈ An/BG describes, under
straightening-unstraightening, a space with G-action with underlying space fib(BΓ → BG) = BG.

Theorem 2.8. Consider an extension of groups

                                         1→π→Γ→G→1

and write F for the family of subgroups F ⊂ Γ such that the composite F ⊂ Γ → G is injective. Then
there is an equivalence of categories

                                        AnF
                                          Γ ≃ (AnG )/Bor(Bπ)

which sends X ∈ AnF    Γ to π\X, where the map π\X → Bor(Bπ) comes from the action of π on X
being free, so that we have the G-equivariant map (π\X)e ≃ Xhπ → ∗hπ ≃ Bπ.
              BOREL ACTIONS IN NONPOSITIVELY CURVED GEOMETRY AND THE NIELSEN REALISATION PROBLEM        6


Proof. Recall that if C is a small category, and X ∈ P(C) is a presheaf, then P(C)/X ≃ P(C/X ),
where C/X = C ×P(C) P(C)/X . Applying this to (AnG )/Bor(Bπ) we get an equivalence
                            (AnG )/Bor(Bπ) ≃ P(O(G) ×AnG (AnG )/Bor(Bπ) ).
Since AnF
        Γ ≃ P(OF (Γ)), we have reduced to provide an equivalence OF (Γ) ≃ O(G) ×AnG
(AnG )/Bor(Bπ) . The claim follows from the following commuting diagram of cartesian squares.
                                                                          Bor
             OF (Γ)          Asphinj,F
                                 /BΓ            An/BΓ ≃ (AnBG )/Bπ              (AnG )/Bor(Bπ)
(6)               π\−

                                                                         Bor
              O(G)           Asphinj
                                 /BG                      An/BG                      AnG

The first square is consists of equivalences in the horizontal direction as in §2.4. The second square is
cartesian as a consequence of §2.5, and the last square by §2.6.                                       □

Corollary 2.9. In the situation of §2.8 is a G-equivariant equivalence
                                            π\EF Γ ≃ Bor(Bπ).

Proof. The equivalence of categories in §2.8 has to send the terminal object of AnFΓ , that is EF Γ,
to the terminal object of (AnG )/Bor(Bπ) , which is clearly Bor(Bπ). But the explicit description of
that equivalence shows that it is implemented by taking the quotient by the π-action, leading to the
assertion.                                                                                        □

                                 3. Actions in nonpositive curvature
      In the following we will abbreviate
                pCH = complete Riemannian manifold of nonpositive sectional curvature
invoking “pseudo Cartan-Hadamard”. In the literature, a Cartan-Hadamard manifold is a pCH-
manifold which is additionally simply connected, hence the notation.

Theorem 3.1 (Cartan-Hadamard). Let M be a pCH, and let x ∈ M . Then the exponential map Tx M →
M is a covering map. In particular, if M is additionally simply connected, it is contractible.

Lemma 3.2. Let M be a pCH with an isometric action by the finite group G. Then M G , with the
restricted Riemannian metric, is a pCH as well.

Proof. Completeness of M G follows from M G ⊂ M being a closed subset, using that a closed sub-
space of a complete metric space space is complete again. Further, M G ⊂ M is easily seen to be
totally geodesic, which implies that the sectional curvature of M G is the restriction of the sectional
curvature of M .                                                                                     □

Proposition 3.3. Let M be a closed connected pCH with an isometric action by the finite group G. Let
Γ = π1 (MhG ). Then M ≃ π1 (M )\EFin Γ,

Proof. Let M
           f denote the universal cover of M . Let Γ
                                                   e denote the group of all homeomorphisms h of
M for which there is a g ∈ G and a commuting diagram as follows.
f

                                                      h
                                                M
                                                f          M
                                                           f
(7)
                                                      g
                                                M          M
                                               REFERENCES                                                7


In particular, we get an inclusion π1 (M ) ,→ Γ
                                              e as the deck transformation group, and G = Γ/π  e 1 (M ).
The residual G-action on M = π1 (M )\M     f is exactly the G-action we started with. Hence, since M   f
is contractible
                                          BΓe≃M  f e ≃ MhG
                                                    hΓ
giving an identification Γe ≃ Γ. Now M  f is a simply connected pCH with an isometric action by the
group eΓ. In particular every finite subgroup of Γ
                                                 e has contractible fixed points: the fixed point set by a
finite subgroup is geodesically convex, and nonempty by Cartan’s fixed point theorem [Lee18, Thm.
12.17]. Let us now argue that every infinite subgroup H ≤ Γ   e contains a nontrivial element of the deck
transformation group, so that it in particular has no fixed points. This follows since the intersection of
H with the kernel of Γe → G is still infinite, in particular contains a nontrivial element of that kernel,
which is precisely the deck transformation group. Hence M    f ≃ EFin Γ,e and by construction of Γe there
is a G-equivariant equivalence M ≃ π1 (M )\M     f.                                                     □
Remark 3.4. It seems likely that the results presented in this section also hold for other nonpositively
curved metric spaces, which also enjoy a Cartan-Hadamard theorem [BH99].

                                              References
[BH99]  Martin R. Bridson and André Haefliger. Metric spaces of non-positive curvature. Vol. 319.
        Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathemat-
        ical Sciences]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999, pp. xxii+643.
[BW08] Jonathan Block and Shmuel Weinberger. “On the generalized Nielsen realization prob-
        lem”. In: Comment. Math. Helv. 83.1 (2008), pp. 21–33. issn: 0010-2571,1420-8946. doi:
        10.4171/CMH/116. url: https://doi.org/10.4171/CMH/116.
[DL24]  James F. Davis and Wolfgang Lück. “On Nielsen realization and manifold models for clas-
        sifying spaces”. In: Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 377.11 (2024), pp. 7557–7600.
[HKK24] Kaif Hilman, Dominik Kirstein, and Christian Kremer. “Equivariant Poincaré duality for
        cyclic groups of prime order and the Nielsen realisation problem”. In: (2024). arXiv: 2409.
        02220 [math.AT]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.02220.
[Ker83] Steven P. Kerckhoff. “The Nielsen realization problem”. In: Ann. of Math. (2) 117.2 (1983),
        pp. 235–265.
[KK]    D. Kirstein and C. Kremer. Isovariant semifree Poincaré spaces and the gap condition. In
        preparation.
[Lee18] John M. Lee. Introduction to Riemannian manifolds. Second. Vol. 176. Graduate Texts in
        Mathematics. Springer, Cham, 2018, pp. xiii+437.
[RS77]  Frank Raymond and Leonard L. Scott. “Failure of Nielsen’s theorem in higher dimensions”.
        In: Arch. Math. (Basel) 29.6 (1977), pp. 643–654.
[Wei23] Shmuel Weinberger. Variations on a theme of Borel: an essay on the role of the fundamental group in rigidity.
        Vol. 213. Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
        2023, pp. xi+351.
