                                              ON THE ZILBER-PINK CONJECTURE FOR COMPLEX ABELIAN
                                                                   VARIETIES

                                                                      FABRIZIO BARROERO AND GABRIEL A. DILL


                                                   Abstract. In this article, we prove that the Zilber-Pink conjecture for abelian varieties
                                                   over an arbitrary field of characteristic 0 is implied by the same statement for abelian
                                                   varieties over the algebraic numbers.
                                                      More precisely, the conjecture holds for subvarieties of dimension at most m in the
                                                   abelian variety A if it holds for subvarieties of dimension at most m in the largest abelian




arXiv:1909.01271v2 [math.NT] 17 Oct 2019
                                                   subvariety of A that is isomorphic to an abelian variety defined over Q̄.
                                                      Dans cet article, nous prouvons que la conjecture de Zilber-Pink pour les variétés
                                                   abéliennes sur un corps quelconque de caracteristique 0 est impliquée par le même énoncé
                                                   pour les variétés abéliennes sur les nombres algébriques.
                                                      Plus précisément, la conjecture est vraie pour les sous-variétés de dimension inférieure
                                                   ou égale à m dans la variété abélienne A si elle est vraie pour les sous-variétés de di-
                                                   mension inférieure ou égale à m dans la plus grande sous-variété abélienne de A qui est
                                                   isomorphe à une variété abélienne définie sur Q̄.




                                                                                       1. Introduction

                                              For us, varieties and curves are irreducible and subvarieties are always irreducible and
                                           closed in the ambient variety. Fields are always of characteristic 0. We work with the
                                           Zariski topology, therefore by open, dense, etc. we always mean Zariski open, Zariski
                                           dense, etc. except when we consider connected mixed Shimura (sub)varieties or (sub)data.
                                              Let A be an abelian variety defined over an algebraically closed field K. A special
                                           subvariety of A is an irreducible component of an algebraic subgroup of A or, equivalently,
                                           a translate of an abelian subvariety by a torsion point. Arbitrary translates of abelian
                                           subvarieties are called cosets or weakly special subvarieties. Special subvarieties are also
                                           called torsion cosets.
                                              The Manin-Mumford conjecture, proven by Raynaud [Ray83], states that a subvariety
                                           of an abelian variety contains at most finitely many maximal special subvarieties. In
                                           particular, a non-special curve contains at most finitely many torsion points.
                                              On the other hand, given a curve in an abelian variety, a dimension count suggests that
                                           it should not intersect a special subvariety of codimension at least 2. If one considers the
                                           union of all special subvarieties of codimension at least 2 and intersects it with a curve
                                           that is not contained in a proper special subvariety, one expects the intersection to be
                                           finite.
                                              The pioneering work [BMZ99] of Bombieri, Masser and Zannier was one of the first to
                                           study this kind of problems and to pass from considering torsion points in subvarieties of
                                           algebraic groups to points lying in algebraic subgroups of appropriate codimension.

                                           Date: October 18, 2019.
                                                                                                  1
2                               F. BARROERO AND G. A. DILL

   Indeed, Bombieri, Masser and Zannier proved that, given a curve defined over the
algebraic numbers and contained in Gnm but not in any of its proper (not necessarily
torsion) cosets, it contains at most finitely many points that lie in an algebraic subgroup
of Gnm of codimension at least 2. The condition of not being contained in a proper coset
was replaced by the necessary one of not lying in a proper torsion coset by Maurin [Mau08]
and independently by Bombieri, Habegger, Masser and Zannier in [BHMZ10].
   In the same paper [BMZ99], Bombieri, Masser and Zannier suggest that a possible
analogue of their result for curves in Gnm could hold for (families of) abelian varieties and
that one could consider higher dimensional subvarieties and intersect them with algebraic
subgroups of higher codimension.
   A couple of years later, Zilber [Zil02] independently stated a conjecture for semiabelian
varieties of which the result of Bombieri, Masser and Zannier is a consequence. This
is formulated in slightly different language and we are going to state it later. Similar
conjectures for Gnm were formulated by Bombieri, Masser and Zannier in [BMZ07].
   We now consider an apparently weaker formulation of the same principle due to Pink.
We introduce the following notation: For a non-negative integer k, we denote by A[k] the
union of all special subvarieties of A of codimension at least k.
   Pink conjectured in [Pin05] that, if V ∩ A[dim V +1] is Zariski dense in V for a subvariety
V of A, then V is contained in a proper special subvariety of A. The conjecture in its full
generality is still open. If V is a curve and K = Q̄, it has been proven by Habegger and
Pila in [HP16]. Previously, partial results have been obtained by Viada [Via03], [Via08],
Rémond and Viada [RV03], Ratazzi [Rat08], Carrizosa [Car08], [Car09] in combination
with Rémond [Rém05], [Rém07], [Rém09], and Galateau [Gal10]. If V is a hypersurface,
Pink’s conjecture follows from the Manin-Mumford conjecture. If the dimension and
codimension of V are at least 2, then all known results place additional restrictions on V
or A, see for instance [CVV14], [CV14], and [HV19].
   In this article, we use a recent result of Gao in [Gao18a], which generalizes work by
Rémond in [Rém09], to reduce Zilber’s conjecture to the case where everything is defined
over Q̄. We even show that it can be reduced to Pink’s formulation of the conjecture
over Q̄. Furthermore, we prove the full conjecture in Corollary 1.7 if no abelian variety of
dimension greater than 4 that is defined over Q̄ embeds into A. For example, the conjecture
holds in a power of an elliptic curve with transcendental j-invariant. Combining Theorem
1.5 below with Theorem 1.1 in [HP16] yields the following theorem:

Theorem 1.1. Let A be an abelian variety defined over an algebraically closed field K (of
characteristic 0) and let V ⊂ A be a curve. Then V ∩ A[2] is finite unless V is contained
in a proper algebraic subgroup of A.

   As mentioned before, Pink’s conjecture is implied by the following Conjecture 1.2 on
unlikely or atypical intersections that was formulated by Zilber in [Zil02] for semiabelian
varieties. An overview of the topic of unlikely intersections is given in the book [Zan12].
   In order to state Conjecture 1.2, we introduce the notion of an atypical subvariety: Let A
be an abelian variety defined over an algebraically closed field K and let V be a subvariety
of A. A subvariety W of V is called atypical (for V in A) if W is an irreducible component
           ON THE ZILBER-PINK CONJECTURE FOR COMPLEX ABELIAN VARIETIES                         3

of the intersection of V with a special subvariety of codimension at least dim V −dim W +1.
It is called maximal if it is not contained in any larger atypical subvariety.

Conjecture 1.2. Let K be an algebraically closed field. Let A be an abelian variety defined
over K and let V be a subvariety of A. Then V contains at most finitely many maximal
atypical subvarieties.

  If V is a curve, then Conjecture 1.2 and Pink’s conjecture are obviously equivalent.
  It turns out that another equivalent formulation of Conjecture 1.2 is more suited to
our proof strategy. In order to state it, we have to introduce the notions of defect and
optimality of a subvariety.

Definition 1.3. If V is a subvariety of A, then there is a smallest special subvariety hV i
containing V . We define the defect δ(V ) of V to be dimhV i − dim V . A subvariety W of
V is called optimal for V in A if δ(U ) > δ(W ) for every subvariety U with W ( U ⊂ V .

   Pink introduced the notion of defect in [Pin05], while the concept of optimality was
introduced in [HP16] by Habegger and Pila. The latter is motivated by Poizat’s notion
of cd-maximality in [Poi01]. cd-maximality is the toric analogue of the notion of geodesic
optimality, which we will introduce later. Using the concept of optimality, Habegger and
Pila formulated the following conjecture, which is equivalent to Conjecture 1.2 by Lemma
2.7 in [HP16].

Conjecture 1.4. Let K be an algebraically closed field and let d be a non-negative integer.
Let A be an abelian variety defined over K and let V be a subvariety of A. Then V contains
at most finitely many optimal subvarieties of defect at most d.

   In the statement of our results, we use the trace of an abelian variety with respect to a
field extension of algebraically closed fields. This can be thought of as the largest abelian
subvariety defined over the smaller field. See Definition 2.3 for a formal definition.
   The following is the main result of this article:

Theorem 1.5. Let K be an algebraically closed field, let m be a non-negative integer and
A an abelian variety defined over K with K/Q̄-trace (T, Tr). Then, if Conjecture 1.4 holds
for some non-negative integer d and subvarieties of dimension at most m in T (over the
field Q̄), it holds for the same d and subvarieties of dimension at most m in A (over K).

   Note that Habegger and Pila have shown in Corollary 9.10 in [HP16] that Conjecture
1.4 can be further reduced to the existence of sufficiently strong lower bounds for the size
of the Galois orbits of optimal singletons over a field of definition that is finitely generated
over Q.
   An analogue of Theorem 1.5 for powers of the multiplicative group was proven in
[BMZ08] by Bombieri, Masser and Zannier. Note that in this case the ambient alge-
braic group is always defined over Q̄. In our situation, this corresponds to the special case
where A is isomorphic to the base change of an abelian variety over Q̄.
   Following a suggestion of Habegger, we prove Conjecture 1.4 in Theorem 7.1 if K = Q̄
and d = 1. This together with the preceding Theorem 1.5 and Theorem 1.1 in [HP16]
implies the following corollary:
4                               F. BARROERO AND G. A. DILL

Corollary 1.6. Let K be an algebraically closed field, let m be a non-negative integer
and A an abelian variety defined over K. Then, Conjecture 1.4 holds for subvarieties of
dimension at most m in A if either m ≤ 1 or d ≤ 1.

   Note that Conjecture 1.4 trivially holds for subvarieties of A of dimension or codimension
0. In codimension 1, every proper optimal subvariety is special, so Conjecture 1.4 follows
from the theorem of Raynaud in [Ray83] (Manin-Mumford conjecture). By Corollary 1.6,
Conjecture 1.4 also holds for subvarieties of codimension 2 since every proper optimal
subvariety of a subvariety of codimension 2 has defect at most 1; for the toric analogue
see [BMZ07] (there proven over Q̄, then extended to C in [BMZ08]). Conjecture 1.4 has
previously been proven for K = Q̄ and subvarieties of codimension 2 in powers of elliptic
curves with complex multiplication (CM) (in [CVV14]) and without CM (in [HV19]) as
well as in arbitrary products of elliptic curves with CM (in [CV14]).
   In particular, Conjecture 1.4 holds for abelian varieties of dimension at most 4 and by
applying Theorem 1.5 we obtain the following corollary:

Corollary 1.7. Let K be an algebraically closed field and A an abelian variety defined
over K with K/Q̄-trace (T, Tr). If dim T ≤ 4, then Conjecture 1.4 holds for A.

   In the proof of Theorem 1.5, we use a double induction firstly on the dimension of A
and secondly on the transcendence degree of its field of definition. If the transcendence
degree of the field of definition is minimal in the sense that A is obtained as a geometric
fiber of a certain universal family Ag,l → Ag,l of abelian varieties, then we apply Gao’s
result to reduce to abelian varieties of smaller dimension in Proposition 3.2.
   We then use Rémond’s results to increase the transcendence degree of the field of defi-
nition in Proposition 4.1. This part of the proof at some points resembles the proof of the
main result in [BMZ08], albeit formulated rather differently.
   The proofs of both propositions begin with the use of the fact that optimal subvarieties
are geodesic-optimal, i.e., optimal with respect to the geodesic defect, which is the analogue
of the defect if one replaces special by weakly special subvarieties. For abelian varieties,
this has been proven by Habegger and Pila. It turns out that their proof can be adapted
to show that the same holds if one considers a slightly different definition of the geodesic
defect, where one replaces weakly special subvarieties by translates of abelian subvarieties
by a torsion point plus a Q̄-point of the trace. We call it the Q̄-geodesic defect and Q̄-
geodesic-optimal subvarieties are then the analogue of geodesic-optimal subvarieties for
this defect.
   To any (Q̄-)geodesic-optimal subvariety, there is an associated abelian subvariety. Thanks
to the results of Gao and Rémond, this abelian subvariety lies in a finite set. If its dimen-
sion is positive, we can quotient out by it and use the inductive hypothesis. Otherwise, we
either use the full strength of Gao’s result to reduce to the trace or we use the inductive
hypothesis on the transcendence degree of the field of definition concluding the proof.
   As mentioned above, we also show that Conjecture 1.4 over an arbitrary algebraically
closed field K can be reduced to Pink’s formulation of the conjecture over Q̄. For the
precise statement of our result, we now give a more articulated version of Pink’s conjecture.
           ON THE ZILBER-PINK CONJECTURE FOR COMPLEX ABELIAN VARIETIES                        5

Recall that we denote by A[k] the union of all special subvarieties of an abelian variety A
of codimension at least k.

Conjecture 1.8. Let K be an algebraically closed field and let d be a non-negative in-
teger. Let A be an abelian variety defined over K and let V be a subvariety of A. If
V ∩ A[max{dim V +1,dim A−d}] is Zariski dense in V , then V is contained in a proper special
subvariety of A.

  The following statement draws a link between the above conjecture and Conjecture 1.4:

Theorem 1.9. Let K be an algebraically closed field, let m be a non-negative integer and
A an abelian variety defined over K. Then, if Conjecture 1.8 holds for some non-negative
integer d and subvarieties of dimension at most m in every abelian subvariety B of A,
Conjecture 1.4 holds for the same d and subvarieties of dimension at most m in A.

   We prove Theorem 1.9 in Section 6. The proof is a direct application of Theorem 9.8(i)
in [HP16]. As pointed out by Ullmo and Zannier, the analogous reduction can be done in
the toric case by imposing additional multiplicative relations on the positive-dimensional
atypical intersections. Combining Theorem 1.9 and Theorem 1.5 yields the following
corollary:

Corollary 1.10. Let K be an algebraically closed field, let m be a non-negative integer
and A an abelian variety defined over K with K/Q̄-trace (T, Tr). Then, if Conjecture 1.8
holds for some non-negative integer d and subvarieties of dimension at most m in every
abelian subvariety T 0 of T (over the field Q̄), Conjecture 1.4 holds for the same d and
subvarieties of dimension at most m in A (over K).

                                     2. Preliminaries

   In this section, we collect some results that are going to be useful in the proof of Theorem
1.5.

2.1. Definitions and a useful lemma. We are going to perform several base changes.
We use the following notation:

Definition 2.1. Let V be a variety over a field K and let K ⊂ L be a field extension.
Then VL = V ×K L is called the base change of V to L. We use analogous notation for
the base change of morphisms between varieties.

  In the proof of Proposition 4.1, we argue by induction on the transcendence degree of
our field of definition. Here is a basic fact used in the inductive step.

Lemma 2.2. Let K ⊂ L be an extension of algebraically closed fields such that L has
transcendence degree 1 over K. Let V be a variety over K and let W be a subvariety of
VL . Then there exists a subvariety W 0 of V with dim W 0 ≤ dim W + 1 such that W ⊂ WL0 .

Proof. We can replace L by a finitely generated subextension of K of transcendence degree
1 over which W is defined. We can then find a curve C over K such that K(C) = L. We
can also find a subvariety W ⊂ V ×K C of dimension dim W + 1 such that the generic
fiber of W over C is W . The closure of the projection of W onto V is our W 0 .        
6                                F. BARROERO AND G. A. DILL

  We now give a formal definition of the trace of an abelian variety with respect to an
extension of algebraically closed fields.

Definition 2.3. ([Con06], Theorem 6.2) Let K ⊂ L be an extension of algebraically closed
fields. Let A be an abelian variety defined over L. The L/K-trace of A is a pair (T, Tr)
of an abelian variety T that is defined over K and a homomorphism of algebraic groups
Tr : TL → A that is characterized uniquely by the fact that for every abelian variety T 0
that is defined over K and every homomorphism of algebraic groups σ : TL0 → A, there is
a homomorphism of algebraic groups τ : T 0 → T such that σ = Tr ◦τL . The map Tr is a
closed embedding.

    We introduce a notation that is going to make the exposition more agile.

Definition 2.4. Let K be an algebraically closed field and let A be an abelian variety over
K. Let m and d be non-negative integers. We say that ZP(A, m, d) holds if Conjecture
1.4 holds for d and for all subvarieties V of A with dim V ≤ m.

    We can then rephrase Theorem 1.5 as the implication

                                ZP(T, m, d) =⇒ ZP(A, m, d)

for non-negative integers m and d and an abelian variety A over an algebraically closed
field K with K/Q̄-trace (T, Tr).

2.2. Smoothness and optimality under homomorphisms. We are going to project
on quotients of abelian varieties by abelian subvarieties several times. The following two
lemmata are going to be useful in this respect:

Lemma 2.5. Let K be an algebraically closed field and let f : V → W be a dominant
morphism of algebraic varieties, defined over K. Then there exists V0 ⊂ V open and dense
such that f (V0 ) is open and dense in W and f |V0 : V0 → f (V0 ) is smooth.

Proof. By Corollary II.8.16 in [Har77], we can find V1 ⊂ V open, dense, and non-singular.
By Theorem 10.19 in [GW10], f (V1 ) contains V2 open and dense in f (V1 ) = f (V ) = W .
By generic smoothness (Corollary III.10.7 in [Har77]), we can find V3 ⊂ V2 open and dense
in V2 and hence in W such that V0 = f |−1 V1 (V3 ) is open and dense in V and f |V0 : V0 →
V3 = f (V0 ) is smooth.                                                                  

Lemma 2.6. Let K be an algebraically closed field. Let f : A → A0 be a homomorphism
of algebraic groups between abelian varieties defined over K. Then the following hold:
     (1) Let V be a subvariety of A. Suppose that V0 ⊂ V is open and dense in V such
         that f (V0 ) is open and dense in f (V ) and f |V0 : V0 → f (V0 ) is smooth. Let W be
         a subvariety of V that is optimal for V in A and intersects V0 . If hW i contains
         a translate of a component of ker f , then f (W ) has defect at most δ(W ) and is
         optimal for f (V ) in A0 .
     (2) If f has finite kernel and ZP(A0 , m, d) holds, then ZP(A, m, d) holds.

Proof. For (1), let W be optimal for V in A such that W ∩V0 6= ∅, where f |V0 : V0 → f (V0 )
is smooth of relative dimension n. Let U be a subvariety of A0 such that f (W ) ⊂ U ⊂ f (V )
           ON THE ZILBER-PINK CONJECTURE FOR COMPLEX ABELIAN VARIETIES                         7

and δ(U ) ≤ δ(f (W )). Since f (hW i) contains hf (W )i and hW i contains a translate of a
component of ker f , we have

     δ(U ) ≤ δ(f (W )) ≤ dim f (hW i) − dim f (W ) = dimhW i − dim ker f − dim f (W ).

Let now U 0 be an irreducible component of f −1 (U ) ∩ V = f |−1   V (U ) that contains W . We
         0                                                    0
have U ∩V0 6= ∅ since it contains W ∩V0 . Furthermore, U ∩V0 is an irreducible component
of f |−1
      V0 (U ∩ f (V0 )). Since f |V0 : V0 → f (V0 ) is smooth of relative dimension n, it follows
that dim U 0 = dim(U 0 ∩ V0 ) = dim(U ∩ f (V0 )) + n = dim U + n. Taking U = f (W )
and using that W ⊂ U 0 shows that dim W ≤ dim f (W ) + n. If U is again an arbitrary
subvariety as above, we deduce that

                   δ(U ) ≤ δ(f (W )) ≤ dimhW i − dim ker f − dim W + n.                   (2.1)

After noting that n ≤ dim ker f , we deduce that the defect of f (W ) is at most the defect
of W .
   Assume now that f (W ) is not optimal for f (V ) in A0 . It follows that we can choose U as
above with f (W ) ( U . Since dim U > dim f (W ), we have W ( U 0 and so δ(U 0 ) > δ(W )
by the optimality of W . Moreover, we certainly have dimhU 0 i ≤ dimhU i + dim ker f , so it
follows that δ(U 0 ) ≤ δ(U ) + dim ker f − n. Using (2.1), we deduce that

              δ(U ) ≤ δ(W ) − dim ker f + n < δ(U 0 ) − dim ker f + n ≤ δ(U ),

a contradiction.
   We can now prove (2) by induction on m. For the base step of the induction, note that
ZP(A, 0, d) holds trivially for all d. Let now V be a subvariety of A of dimension m and
let W be an optimal subvariety for V in A such that W has defect at most d. By Lemma
2.5, we can find V0 ⊂ V open and dense such that f (V0 ) is open and dense in f (V ) and
f |V0 : V0 → f (V0 ) is smooth.
   If W ⊂ V \V0 , then W is contained in one of the finitely many components of V \V0 . The
dimension of that component is at most m−1 and W has defect at most d and is optimal for
that component in A, so we are done by induction. Otherwise, we have W ∩ V0 6= ∅. Since
ker f is finite, a translate of one of its components is trivially contained in hW i, so we can
apply (1) to find that f (W ) is optimal for f (V ) in A0 and has defect at most d. As f has
finite kernel, we have dim f (V ) = dim V , so it follows from ZP(A0 , m, d) that f (W ) belongs
to a finite set of varieties. The same follows for W since W is an irreducible component
of f −1 (f (W )) because of the equality dim W = dim f (W ) = dim f −1 (f (W )).              

2.3. Abelian schemes. We start this subsection by associating to any abelian variety
over an algebraically closed field of characteristic 0 a “subfamily” of the universal family of
principally polarized abelian varieties of fixed dimension with some fixed level structure.
   We denote by Ag,l the moduli space of principally polarized abelian varieties of dimen-
sion g with symplectic level l-structure over Q̄. For l ≥ 3, this is a fine moduli space and
we denote by Ag,l the corresponding universal family over Ag,l .

Lemma 2.7. Let K be an algebraically closed field. Let A be an abelian variety of di-
mension g defined over K. Fix a natural number l ≥ 3. Then there exists a subvariety
8                               F. BARROERO AND G. A. DILL

S ⊂ Ag,l with the following property: Let A = Ag,l ×Ag,l S and let A0 be the generic fiber
of A → S. There exists a field embedding Q̄(S) ,→ K such that A is isogenous to A0K .

Proof. Over K, the abelian variety A is isogenous to a principally polarized abelian variety
by Corollary 1 on p. 234 of [Mum70] and so we can assume without loss of generality that
A is itself principally polarized. We can find a field K0 ⊂ K and an abelian variety B
defined over K0 such that Q̄ ⊂ K0 , K0 is finitely generated over Q̄, and A = BK . Without
loss of generality, we can assume that all torsion points of B of order l are K0 -rational.
We can find a normal variety V , defined over Q̄, with Q̄(V ) = K0 . By spreading out (see
Theorem 3.2.1 and Table 1 on pp. 306–307 of [Poo17]), we find an abelian scheme B → V
with generic fiber B (after maybe replacing V by an open dense subset). The principal
polarization of B gives a principal polarization of B → V by the argument on p. 6 of
[FC90]. Among the l-torsion points of B, we choose a symplectic basis with respect to
the Weil pairing induced by the principal polarization. The elements of this basis extend
to l-torsion sections of B → V . In this way, B → V becomes a principally polarized
abelian scheme with symplectic level l-structure as defined in the Appendix to Chapter 7
of [MFK94].
   Since Ag,l is a fine moduli space by the Appendix to Chapter 7 of [MFK94], we get a
morphism ι : V → Ag,l , defined over Q̄, such that B is isomorphic to Ag,l ×Ag,l V . Let S
be the closure of ι(V ), let A = Ag,l ×Ag,l S and let A0 be the generic fiber of A → S. It
follows from the universal property of the fiber product that B is isomorphic to A ×S V .
The dominant morphism ι : V → S yields a field embedding Q̄(S) ,→ K0 . Passing to the
generic fiber over V shows that B is isomorphic to A0K0 .                                 

   Let S be a variety over an algebraically closed field K. Given an abelian scheme A → S
with geometric generic fiber A, we need to extend abelian subvarieties and torsion points
of A and K-points of the trace of A to abelian subschemes, torsion sections, and constant
sections, possibly after a base change.

Definition 2.8. Let S be a variety and A → S an abelian scheme, both defined over an
algebraically closed field K. A subgroup scheme (resp. an open subgroup scheme, resp. a
closed subgroup scheme) B of A is a subscheme (resp. an open subscheme, resp. a closed
subscheme) of A such that the zero section S → A factors through B and the morphisms
B ×S B → A and B → A that are induced by the addition and inversion morphism of A
respectively factor through B. An irreducible subgroup scheme B of A is called an abelian
subscheme if B → S is flat, proper, and dominant.

   Equivalently, an abelian subscheme is an irreducible closed subgroup scheme that is
flat over S. An abelian subscheme B is itself an abelian scheme over S: For each natural
number N , the multiplication-by-N morphism from B to B is dominant and proper, hence
surjective. It follows that the geometric fibers of B must be connected as desired.

Lemma 2.9. Let S be a normal variety and A → S an abelian scheme, both defined
over an algebraically closed field K. Let ξ be the generic point of S. Suppose that every
l-torsion point of (Aξ )K(S) is K(S)-rational for some natural number l ≥ 3, where K(S)
            ON THE ZILBER-PINK CONJECTURE FOR COMPLEX ABELIAN VARIETIES                           9

denotes a fixed algebraic closure of K(S). Then every abelian subvariety B of (Aξ )K(S) is
the geometric generic fiber of an abelian subscheme B ⊂ A.

Proof. Fix an abelian subvariety B of (Aξ )K(S) . It is a consequence of the Poincaré
reducibility theorem that there exists an endomorphism ψ of (Aξ )K(S) such that B is the
irreducible component of ker(ψ) containing the neutral element. By Theorem 2.4 in [Sil92],
every endomorphism of (Aξ )K(S) is the base change of an endomorphism of Aξ . It follows
that every abelian subvariety of (Aξ )K(S) is the base change of an abelian subvariety of
Aξ . We identify ψ and B with the corresponding endomorphism and abelian subvariety
of Aξ respectively.
   By Theorem 3.2.1(iii) in [Poo17] (cf. Théorème 8.8.2(i) in [Gro66]), the endomorphism
ψ spreads out to a morphism from AU = A ×S U to itself for U ⊂ S open and dense.
This morphism has to be an endomorphism by Corollary 6.4 on p. 117 of [MFK94]. By
Proposition 2.7 in Chapter I of [FC90], as S is normal, this endomorphism extends to an
endomorphism Ψ : A → A.
   We get a closed subgroup scheme ker(Ψ) of A. Let ker(Ψ)0 be the functor defined in
Section 3 of Exposé VIB in [ABD+ 65]. We want to apply Corollaire 4.4 from Exposé VIB
in [ABD+ 65] by verifying condition (ii).
   Fix s ∈ S. The fiber ker(Ψ)s is an algebraic group over a field (of characteristic 0 as
always) and hence smooth. Since Ψ is proper, Ψ(A) is a closed irreducible subscheme of A
and it follows from the Fiber Dimension Theorem (Lemma 14.109 in [GW10]) applied to
the morphism Ψ(A) → S that dim Ψ(As ) ≥ dim Ψ(Aξ ). Similarly, we have dim ker(Ψ)s ≥
dim B. Furthermore, we have dim As = dim ker(Ψ)s + dim Ψ(As ). But then it follows
from dim Ψ(Aξ ) + dim B = dim Aξ = dim As that dim ker(Ψ)s = dim B. This means that
the function s 7→ dim ker(Ψ)s is constant on S.
   Therefore, we can apply Corollaire 4.4 of Exposé VIB in [ABD+ 65] to find that ker(Ψ)0
is represented by an open subgroup scheme of ker(Ψ), which we also denote by ker(Ψ)0 .
By the same Corollaire, ker(Ψ)0 is smooth over S. By definition, the generic fiber of
ker(Ψ)0 is equal to B.
   The number of geometrically irreducible components of the fibers of ker(Ψ) is uniformly
bounded. Therefore, for some large N , we have that ker(Ψ)0 is equal to the image of
ker(Ψ) under the multiplication-by-N morphism. As this morphism is proper, it follows
that ker(Ψ)0 is closed in A and therefore the morphism ker(Ψ)0 → S is proper. Since
ker(Ψ)0 is smooth over S, it is flat over S. As its generic fiber is irreducible and it is flat
over S, ker(Ψ)0 is irreducible as well by Proposition 2.3.4(iii) in [Gro65] and Section 2.1.8
of Chapter 0 of [Gro60]. Since ker(Ψ)0 is a subgroup scheme that dominates S, this shows
that ker(Ψ)0 is an abelian subscheme of A with generic fiber equal to B as desired.          

   Lemma 2.9 does not hold if the base variety S and the abelian scheme A are allowed to
be arbitrary. We provide a non-trivial counterexample: We let S ⊂ A1K \{0, 1} ×K A1K be
defined by the equation (λ + 1)2 λ = µ2 in the affine coordinates (λ, µ) on A2K . Let ξ be
the generic point of S. We consider two elliptic schemes E and E 0 over S that are defined
in P2K ×K S by equations y 2 z = x(x − z)(x − λz) and λy 02 z 0 = x0 (x0 − z 0 )(x0 − λz 0 ) in the
projective coordinates [x : y : z] and [x0 : y 0 : z 0 ] respectively. We set A = E ×S E 0 and let
10                               F. BARROERO AND G. A. DILL

B be the abelian subvariety of Aξ ⊂ P2K(S) ×K(S) P2K(S) defined by the equations xz 0 = x0 z
            µ
and yz 0 = λ+1 y 0 z. If p = (−1, 0) ∈ S(K) ⊂ A2K (K) = K 2 is the singular point of S, then
B extends to an abelian subscheme of A ×S (S\{p}), but the fiber over p of the closure of
B in A has two irreducible components.

Lemma 2.10. Let S be a normal variety and A → S an abelian scheme, both defined
over an algebraically closed field K. Let ξ be the generic point of S. Suppose that every
l-torsion point of (Aξ )K(S) is K(S)-rational for some natural number l ≥ 3, where K(S)
denotes a fixed algebraic closure of K(S). Let N be a fixed natural number.
    Then there exists a normal variety S 0 over K with generic point η and a finite surjective
étale morphism S 0 → S such that the following hold for A0 = A ×S S 0 (after fixing an
algebraic closure K(S 0 ) of K(S 0 )):
     (1) Every torsion point of (A0η )K(S 0 ) of order N is the geometric generic fiber of a
         torsion section S 0 → A0 .                                               
     (2) Let (T, Tr) denote the K(S 0 )/K-trace of (A0η )K(S 0 ) . Then Tr TK(S 0 ) is the geo-
         metric generic fiber of an abelian subscheme T of A0 that is isomorphic (as an
         abelian scheme) to T ×K S 0 .

Proof. Let  : S → A be the zero section, let g denote the relative dimension of A → S and
let [N ] : A → A denote the multiplication-by-N morphism. The morphism [N ]−1 ((S)) →
S is finite and étale since  is a closed embedding and [N ] is finite and étale by Proposition
20.7 in [Mil86].
   Using Proposition 2.3.4(iii) in [Gro65], we deduce that every irreducible component
of [N ]−1 ((S)) → S surjects onto S. Furthermore, [N ]−1 ((S)) is normal by [The19],
Tag 033C, as it is étale over the normal variety S. Hence, no two distinct irreducible
components of [N ]−1 ((S)) → S can intersect each other. Therefore, every irreducible
component of [N ]−1 ((S)) is finite and étale over S.
   We can then achieve (1) by successively base changing to irreducible components of
[N ]−1 ((S)) which have degree > 1 over S and using at the end that a finite étale morphism
of degree 1 is an isomorphism. We take S 0 to be the    base variety we end up with.
   For (2), we then first use Lemma 2.9 to identify Tr TK(S 0 ) with the geometric generic
fiber of an abelian subscheme T of A0 . Second, we note that Tr is the base change of a
homomorphism TK(S 0 ) → A0η by Theorem 2.4 in [Sil92]. We denote this homomorphism
also by Tr. Third, arguing as in the proof of Lemma 2.9, we can extend the induced iso-
                                                    
morphism of abelian varieties TK(S 0 ) → Tr TK(S 0 ) to an isomorphism of abelian schemes
T ×K S 0 → T .                                                                         

2.4. Defect and optimality. Here we show that extending the field of definition cannot
give new optimal subvarieties.

Lemma 2.11. Let K ⊂ L be an extension of algebraically closed fields. Let A be an abelian
variety defined over K and let V be a subvariety of A. If W is an optimal subvariety for
VL in AL , then there exists an optimal subvariety W 0 for V in A such that W = (W 0 )L
and δ(W ) = δ(W 0 ).
           ON THE ZILBER-PINK CONJECTURE FOR COMPLEX ABELIAN VARIETIES                       11

Proof. Since A is defined over K, which is algebraically closed, we have that any special
subvariety of AL is the base change of a special subvariety of A. Therefore, if V is a
subvariety of A, any optimal subvariety for VL in AL is an irreducible component of an
intersection VL ∩ HL for some special subvariety H of A and is then the base change of a
subvariety W ⊂ V that must be optimal for V in A and of the same defect.               
  We also introduce a new kind of defect.

Definition 2.12. Let K ⊂ L be an extension of algebraically closed fields. Let A be
an abelian variety defined over L with L/K-trace (T, Tr). For a subvariety V of A we
define hV iK,geo to be the smallest translate of an abelian subvariety of A by a point in
Tr(T (K)) + Ators that contains V . We call K-geodesic defect the difference δK,geo (V ) =
dimhV iK,geo − dim V . If W ⊂ V ⊂ A, we say that W is K-geodesic-optimal for V in A if
δK,geo (U ) > δK,geo (W ) for every subvariety U with W ( U ⊂ V .

   In the case K = L, we drop K in the notation as we are considering usual weakly special
subvarieties, the geodesic defect, and geodesic optimality as defined in [HP16].
   Note that A is isogenous to TL ×B for an abelian variety B such that there exists no non-
trivial homomorphism between TL and B. Therefore the intersection of two translates of
abelian subvarieties of A by points in Tr(T (K)) + Ators is again a finite union of translates
of abelian subvarieties of A by points in Tr(T (K)) + Ators , so hV iK,geo is well defined.
   In [HP16], Habegger and Pila defined the defect condition for subvarieties of complex
abelian varieties. If W and V are subvarieties of A such that W ⊂ V , then the condition
says that δ(V ) − δgeo (V ) ≤ δ(W ) − δgeo (W ). They then showed that the fact that this
holds in this setting implies that optimal subvarieties are also geodesic-optimal. Here
we do the same for δK,geo in place of δgeo and show that optimal subvarieties are also
K-geodesic-optimal.

Lemma 2.13. In the setting of Definition 2.12, let W and V be subvarieties of A such
that W ⊂ V . Then, the following hold:
   (1) We have δ(V ) − δK,geo (V ) ≤ δ(W ) − δK,geo (W ).
   (2) If W ⊂ V is optimal for V in A, then it is K-geodesic-optimal for V in A.

Proof. The deduction of (2) from (1) is done analogously to the proof of Proposition 4.5
in [HP16].
   It remains to prove (1): the defect condition in this case amounts to proving that

                     dimhV i − dimhV iK,geo ≤ dimhW i − dimhW iK,geo .

For this, we can just copy the proof of Proposition 4.3(ii) in [HP16].                       
  The geodesic defect of a subvariety of the connected mixed Shimura variety (Ag,l )C ,
which we define below, is linked to the C-geodesic defect of the components of its geometric
generic fiber.

Lemma 2.14. Suppose that U is a subvariety of (Ag,l )C and S is its image under the
projection to (Ag,l )C . Let U be an irreducible component of the fiber of U over the geometric
generic point of S. We define the geodesic defect δgeo (U) of U to be dimhSigeo − dim S +
12                               F. BARROERO AND G. A. DILL

dimhU iC,geo − dim U , where hSigeo is the smallest weakly special subvariety of (Ag,l )C (see
[UY11] for a definition and a characterization) that contains S. This definition of geodesic
defect is independent of the choice of U and agrees with δws as defined in Definition 8.1(i)
in [Gao18a].

Proof. The independence from the choice of U follows from the fact that the irreducible
components of the fiber of U over the geometric
                                               generic point of S form one orbit under
the action of the Galois group Gal C(S)/C(S) and h·iC,geo commutes with the action of
                
Gal C(S)/C(S) .
   In Definition 8.1(i) in [Gao18a], the defect δws (U) is defined as dim U biZar −dim U, where
U biZar is the smallest bi-algebraic subvariety of (Ag,l )C containing U. By Proposition
5.3 in [Gao18b], this is equal to dimhSigeo − dim S + dim W − dim U, where W is the
smallest generically special subvariety of sg type (as defined in Definition 1.5 in [Gao18b])
of (Ag,l )C ×(Ag,l )C S containing U.
   It is enough to show that dimhU iC,geo − dim U = dim W − dim U. By looking at the
geometric generic fiber of W, we see that dimhU iC,geo − dim U ≤ dim W − dim U. For the
inequality in the other direction to hold, we need to know that after a finite surjective base
change we can extend abelian subvarieties and torsion points of the geometric generic fiber
and C-points of the trace to abelian subschemes, torsion sections, and constant sections
respectively. This is ensured by Lemma 2.9 and Lemma 2.10; note that after a finite
surjective base change we can assume the base to be normal.                                  

Definition 2.15. If W ⊂ V are subvarieties of (Ag,l )C , we say that W is geodesic-optimal
for V in (Ag,l )C if δgeo (U) > δgeo (W) for every subvariety U with W ( U ⊂ V.


                       3. A statement in the universal family

   The following result is a fundamental tool for our proof. It relies on a result of Gao,
which is formulated in the language of mixed Shimura varieties. We show that, in the
special setting of an abelian variety that is the geometric generic fiber of a “subfamily”
of the universal family, Gao’s result yields a strengthening of what is sometimes called a
“Structure Theorem” proven by Rémond for abelian varieties in [Rém09]. The analogous
statement for powers of the multiplicative group was proven by Poizat in Corollaire 3.7 in
[Poi01] and independently by Bombieri, Masser and Zannier in [BMZ07]. Recall that Ag,l
is a variety over Q̄.

Theorem 3.1. Let S be a subvariety of Ag,l and A = Ag,l ×Ag,l S. Let A be the geometric
generic fiber of A and V a subvariety of A and let (T, Tr) be the K/Q̄-trace of A, where K
is a fixed algebraic closure of Q̄(S). There is a finite set of pairs (q0 , H), where q0 ∈ A(K)
is a torsion point and H is an abelian subvariety of A, and a finite union Z of proper
subvarieties of V such that for every optimal W ⊂ V one of the following holds:
     (1) W is contained in Z, or
     (2) there exists some point t ∈ Tr(T (Q̄)) such that W is an irreducible component of
         (t + q0 + H) ∩ V and t + q0 + H ⊂ hW i.
            ON THE ZILBER-PINK CONJECTURE FOR COMPLEX ABELIAN VARIETIES                         13

Proof. We want to apply a result of Gao (Theorem 8.2 in [Gao18a]). For this, we need
to make a base change. Let K 0 be a fixed algebraic closure of the function field C(SC )
of SC . Both K and C embed into K 0 and the intersection of their images is Q̄ since the
transcendence degree of K 0 /C is equal to the transcendence degree of K/Q̄.
   Let W be optimal for V in A. We want to show that WK 0 is optimal for VK 0 in AK 0 . If
U is an optimal subvariety for VK 0 containing WK 0 and satisfying δ(U ) ≤ δ(WK 0 ), then, by
Lemma 2.11, U is the base change of a subvariety of V of the same defect that is optimal
for V in A. Because of the optimality of W for V in A, that subvariety has to be equal to
W , so U = WK 0 .
   By Lemma 2.13, WK 0 is also C-geodesic-optimal for VK 0 in AK 0 .
   Suppose first that WK 0 ⊂ σ(VK 0 ) for some σ ∈ Gal(K 0 /C(SC )) with σ(VK 0 ) 6= VK 0 .
Then WK 0 is contained in VK 0 ∩ σ(VK 0 ) ( VK 0 . Let Zσ ⊂ A be maximal among all finite
unions of subvarieties Z 0 ⊂ A with ZK   0 ⊂ V 0 ∩ σ(V 0 ) (and equal to the closure of the
                                          0     K         K
union of all such Z 0 ). Then Zσ is a finite union of proper subvarieties of V and contains
W . We set Z = ∪σ(VK 0 )6=VK 0 Zσ ; the union is finite since σ(VK 0 ) varies in a finite set. We
deduce that W ⊂ Z, so (1) is satisfied.
   From now on, we assume that WK 0 ⊂ σ(VK 0 ) only holds if σ(VK 0 ) = VK 0 (for σ ∈
Gal(K 0 /C(SC ))), and we want to prove that (2) holds.
   The subvarieties WK 0 and VK 0 are irreducible components of the base change of sub-
varieties of the generic fiber of AC . We define W and V to be the closures of these two
subvarieties in AC . Note that they are subvarieties of dimension dim S + dim W and
dim S + dim V respectively and that they dominate SC .
   In Lemma 2.14, we defined the geodesic defect of subvarieties of (Ag,l )C and we have
seen that it coincides with δws of [Gao18a]. Let U ⊂ V be a geodesic-optimal subvariety
for V that contains W and satisfies δgeo (U) ≤ δgeo (W). Using that W ⊂ U, we find that
there exists an irreducible component U of the geometric generic fiber of U that contains
WK 0 and satisfies

  δC,geo (U ) = δgeo (U) − dimhSigeo + dim S
                                            ≤ δgeo (W) − dimhSigeo + dim S = δC,geo (WK 0 ).

Since U ⊂ V, we can deduce that U ⊂ σ(VK 0 ) for some σ ∈ Gal(K 0 /C(SC )). Since
WK 0 ⊂ U ⊂ σ(VK 0 ), we must have σ(VK 0 ) = VK 0 by our assumption from above.
   Since WK 0 is C-geodesic-optimal for VK 0 in AK 0 , it follows that WK 0 = U and therefore
W = U. Hence, W is geodesic-optimal for V in the connected mixed Shimura variety
(Ag,l )C .
   Let W biZar be the smallest bi-algebraic subvariety of (Ag,l )C that contains W. It is
determined by a tuple (Q, Y + , N, ỹ), where (Q, Y + ) is a connected mixed Shimura subda-
tum of (GSp2g nQ2g , Hg × Cg ), N is a normal subgroup of the derived subgroup Qder , and
ỹ ∈ Y + . Here Hg denotes the Siegel upper half space. Thanks to Theorem 8.2 in [Gao18a],
we know that the triple (Q, Y + , N ) lies in a finite set that does not depend on W. By
Proposition 5.3 in [Gao18b], W biZar is a generically special subvariety of sg type (as defined
in Definition 1.5 in [Gao18b]) of (Ag,l )C ×(Ag,l )C π(W biZar ), where π : (Ag,l )C → (Ag,l )C is
14                                F. BARROERO AND G. A. DILL

the structural morphism, so up to finite surjective base change a translate of an abelian
subscheme by a torsion section and a constant section.
   Looking at the proof of Proposition 3.3 on p. 240 of [Gao17], we see that the abelian
subscheme and the torsion section are uniquely determined by (Q, Y + , N ). Note that ỹG in
the proof of Proposition 3.3 in [Gao17] can be assumed fixed as π(W) = SC is independent
of W. After intersecting W biZar with AC and passing to the geometric generic fiber, we
deduce from this together with Lemma 2.14 that there exists a finite set of tuples (q0 , H),
where q0 ∈ A(K) is a torsion point and H is an abelian subvariety of A, such that there
exists some point t ∈ Tr0 (T 0 (C)) with hWK 0 iC,geo = t + (q0 + H)K 0 . Here, (T 0 , Tr0 ) is the
K 0 /C-trace of AK 0 .
   First of all, Tr0 : TK 0 → A 0 is the base change of a homomorphism T 0
                           0      K                                               KC → AKC by
Theorem 2.4 in [Sil92], because all torsion points of domain and codomain are KC-rational.
Hence, (T 0 , Tr0 ) is equal to the base change of the KC/C-trace of AKC . Furthermore, this
latter trace is equal to (TC , TrKC ) by Theorem 6.8 in [Con06]. It follows that T 0 = TC and
Tr0 = TrK 0 .
   Since it is C-geodesic-optimal for VK 0 in AK 0 , WK 0 itself must be equal to an irreducible
component of (t + (q0 + H)K 0 ) ∩ VK 0 .
   We now want to show that we can take t to be the image of the base change of a
Q̄-rational point of T . Indeed, the image of any point in X = Tr−1      K 0 (WK + (−q0 + H)K )
                                                                                0                 0

that is the base change of a C-rational point of TC can be chosen as t. The finite union of
subvarieties X is equal to the base change of Tr−1 (W + (−q0 + H)) ⊂ TK . On the other
hand, one can see that X is equal to Tr−1  K 0 (t + HK ). Since Tr is a homomorphism and every
                                                      0

algebraic subgroup of TK 0 is the base change of an algebraic subgroup of T , this means
that X is the base change of a union of translates of an abelian subvariety of TC by a point
in TC (C). Since C ∩ K = Q̄, it follows from Corollaire 4.8.11 in [Gro65] that X is equal to
the base change of a union of algebraic subvarieties of T and t can be chosen as the image
of the base change of a point of T (Q̄). If we denote this point also by t, we have that W is
an irreducible component of (t + q0 + H) ∩ V . Since (t + q0 + H)K 0 = hWK 0 iC,geo ⊂ hW iK 0 ,
it also follows that t + q0 + H ⊂ hW i.                                                          
     We now apply Theorem 3.1 to our problem.
Proposition 3.2. Let S ⊂ Ag,l be a subvariety of positive dimension. Let A = Ag,l ×Ag,l S
and let A be the geometric generic fiber of A → S. If ZP(B, m, d) holds for all quotients
B of A by a positive-dimensional abelian subvariety, then ZP(A, m, d) holds.
Proof. We induct on m. Clearly ZP(A, 0, d) holds for all d.
   Let V be a subvariety of A of dimension m and let W ⊂ V be an optimal subvariety of
defect at most d. Let (T, Tr) denote the K/Q̄-trace of A, where K is an algebraic closure
of Q̄(S). We have Tr(TK ) 6= A since dim S > 0.
   We apply Theorem 3.1. If W satisfies (1), then W is contained in a component of Z
and optimal for that component. Furthermore, W has defect at most d, so we are done by
induction on m. If W satisfies (2), then W is an irreducible component of (t + q0 + H) ∩ V ,
where t ∈ Tr(T (Q̄)) and (q0 , H) lies in a finite set of pairs of torsion points and abelian
subvarieties of A that does not depend on W . We can assume H and q0 fixed. We now
           ON THE ZILBER-PINK CONJECTURE FOR COMPLEX ABELIAN VARIETIES                       15

quotient out by H. Let f : A → A/H be the corresponding morphism. We get a subvariety
f (V ) of A/H and a point w such that {w} = f (W ). By Lemma 2.5, we can find V0 ⊂ V
open and dense such that f (V0 ) is open and dense in f (V ) and f |V0 : V0 → f (V0 ) is smooth
of some relative dimension n.
   If W ⊂ V \V0 , then W is contained in one of finitely many subvarieties of V of dimension
at most m − 1 (and of course optimal for that subvariety in A and of defect at most d),
so we are done by induction. Hence we can assume that W ∩ V0 6= ∅. Since W ∩ V0 is an
irreducible component of f |−1
                             V0 ({w}), it follows that n = dim(W ∩ V0 ) = dim W .
   If dim H = 0, then W = {t + q0 }. So the singleton {t} is contained in some irreducible
component V 0 of Tr(TK ) ∩ (−q0 + V ). It has defect at most d and is optimal for V 0 in
Tr(TK ). Since Tr(TK ) 6= A, there is an isogeny between Tr(TK ) and a quotient of A
by some positive-dimensional abelian subvariety. We can use our hypothesis and Lemma
2.6(2) to deduce that t and therefore W belongs to a finite set. Hence, we can assume
that dim H > 0.
   By Theorem 3.1, we have t + q0 + H ⊂ hW i and therefore hW i contains a translate of a
component of ker f = H. It follows from Lemma 2.6(1) that {w} has defect at most d and
is optimal for f (V ) in A/H. Now we can use that ZP(A/H, m, d) holds to deduce that w
and hence W as an irreducible component of f −1 ({w}) ∩ V must lie in a finite set.          

                    4. Reduction of the transcendence degree

  The following proposition gives us the final reduction to the algebraic case or to what
we proved in Proposition 3.2.

Proposition 4.1. Let m and d be non-negative integers. Let K ⊂ L be an extension
of algebraically closed fields. Let A be an abelian variety defined over K. If ZP(A, m, d)
holds, then ZP(AL , m, d) holds as well.

Proof. Let V be a subvariety of AL of dimension at most m. We can find an algebraically
closed subfield L1 of L that has finite transcendence degree over K and a subvariety
V1 of AL1 such that V = (V1 )L . If W is any optimal subvariety for V in AL , then by
Lemma 2.11 it is equal to (W1 )L for an optimal subvariety W1 for V1 in AL1 such that
δ(W1 ) = δ(W ). Hence, it suffices to prove the proposition under the assumption that L
has finite transcendence degree over K.
   Arguing by induction on the transcendence degree of L over K, one can see that it is
enough to prove our statement when L has transcendence degree 1 over K.
   We proceed by induction on m. Clearly ZP(AL , 0, d) holds for all d, so, for some positive
m, we will deduce ZP(AL , m, d) from ZP(AL , m − 1, d) and ZP(A, m, d).
   Let V be a subvariety of AL of dimension m. If V = VL0 for some V 0 ⊂ A then we are
done by Lemma 2.11 and ZP(A, m, d). We will then assume that this is not the case.
   Let VL0 be the smallest subvariety of AL that is the base change of some V 0 ⊂ A and
contains V . It exists and has dimension m or m + 1 by Lemma 2.2 but the first case is
not possible because it would imply that V = VL0 .
   Let W ⊂ V be an optimal subvariety for V in AL that has defect at most d. We can
assume without loss of generality that W 6= V .
16                                F. BARROERO AND G. A. DILL

   We let WL0 be the smallest subvariety of AL that is the base change of some W 0 ⊂ A
and contains W . By Lemma 2.2, we have either W = WL0 or dim WL0 = dim W + 1.
   If W = WL0 , then W is contained in ZL0 ⊂ V for Z 0 ⊂ A maximal among all finite unions
of subvarieties Z 00 ⊂ A with ZL00 ⊂ V (and equal to the closure of the union of all such Z 00 ).
Since V 6= VL0 , the dimension of ZL0 is at most m − 1. Of course, W is also optimal for the
component of ZL0 that contains it and therefore lies in a finite set because ZP(AL , m − 1, d)
holds. We can therefore assume that W ( WL0 and so dim WL0 = dim W + 1.
   Recall that, by Lemma 2.11, an optimal subvariety for VL0 in AL is the base change of
an optimal subvariety for V 0 in A. Let UL0 be such an optimal subvariety for VL0 in AL
that contains WL0 and satisfies δ(UL0 ) ≤ δ(WL0 ). Note that hW i = hWL0 i and hV i = hVL0 i
because, for instance, VL0 ⊂ hV i ∩ VL0 by definition. It follows that δ(WL0 ) = δ(W ) − 1, so
δ(UL0 ) ≤ d − 1.
   We claim that UL0 6= VL0 . If not, we could deduce that δ(VL0 ) = δ(UL0 ) ≤ δ(WL0 ). It would
then follow that δ(V ) = δ(VL0 ) + 1 ≤ δ(WL0 ) + 1 = δ(W ), which contradicts the optimality
of W ( V for V .
   We deduce that UL0 ( VL0 and hence UL0 ∩ V ( V , otherwise UL0 ⊃ V would contradict
the minimality of VL0 . Since W ⊂ UL0 ∩ V and W has defect at most d and is optimal for
a component of UL0 ∩ V in AL , it suffices to show that U 0 and therefore UL0 belongs to a
finite set and then we are done as dim(UL0 ∩ V ) < dim V and ZP(AL , m − 1, d) holds.
   It follows from the optimality of U 0 for V 0 in A and Proposition 4.5 in [HP16] that U 0
is also geodesic-optimal for V 0 in A. We can apply the results of Rémond in [Rém09] (the
connection to geodesic optimality is explained in Section 6 of [HP16]) to deduce that there
exists a finite set of abelian subvarieties of A such that for each geodesic-optimal U for V 0
in A there exists H in this finite set such that for any u ∈ U (K) we have hU igeo = u + H
(and U is an irreducible component of (u + H) ∩ V 0 since it is geodesic-optimal for V 0 ).
   Since H varies in a finite set, we can assume it fixed and divide out by it. Let f : A →
A/H be the corresponding morphism. We get a subvariety f (V 0 ) of A/H and a point
u0 ∈ (A/H)(K) such that {u0 } = f (U 0 ).
   By Lemma 2.5, we can find V00 ⊂ V 0 open and dense such that f (V00 ) is open and dense
in f (V 0 ) and f |V00 : V00 → f (V00 ) is smooth of relative dimension n = dim V00 − dim f (V00 ) =
dim V 0 − dim f (V 0 ). If U 0 is contained in V 0 \V00 , then U 0 is contained in one of finitely
many subvarieties of V 0 of dimension at most m. As U 0 is optimal for V 0 , it is also optimal
for that subvariety. We have δ(U 0 ) ≤ δ(W 0 ) = δ(W ) − 1 ≤ d − 1. By ZP(A, m, d), there
are then only finitely many possibilities for U 0 .
   Hence we can assume that U 0 ∩ V00 6= ∅. Since U 0 is an irreducible component of
(u+H)∩V 0 (for some u ∈ U 0 (K)), U 0 ∩V00 is then an irreducible component of (u+H)∩V00 =
f |−1
   V00
       ({u0 }). It follows that n = dim(U 0 ∩ V00 ) = dim U 0 .
   Since we know that W 6= WL0 , we have dim W 0 > 0 and hence n = dim U 0 > 0.
   Note that hU 0 i contains a translate of a component of ker f = H since hU 0 igeo = u+H ⊂
hU 0 i (for u ∈ U 0 (K) arbitrary). It therefore follows from Lemma 2.6(1) that {u0 } is optimal
for f (V 0 ) in A/H and has defect at most d − 1. Furthermore, f (V 0 ) is a subvariety of
A/H of dimension dim V 0 − n ≤ dim V 0 − 1 = m.
            ON THE ZILBER-PINK CONJECTURE FOR COMPLEX ABELIAN VARIETIES                         17

   Now, there is a homomorphism A/H → A of algebraic groups with finite kernel, so
ZP(A/H, m, d) holds by Lemma 2.6(2). Thus, u0 lies in a finite set. As U 0 is a component
of f −1 ({u0 }) ∩ V 0 , it lies in a finite set as well.                               

                                 5. Proof of Theorem 1.5

   Fix non-negative integers m and d. We argue by induction on the dimension of A. If
the dimension of A is at most 1, the statement holds trivially. Let now A be an abelian
variety of dimension > 1 over an algebraically closed field K and assume that Theorem 1.5
holds for the fixed m and d and all abelian varieties of smaller dimension. In particular,
it holds for all quotients of A by abelian subvarieties of positive dimension.
   Applying Lemma 2.7, we find a subvariety S of Ag,l and an embedding of Q̄(S) into K
such that A is isogenous to A0K , where A0 is the generic fiber of Ag,l ×Ag,l S.
   Moreover, the K/Q̄-traces of A and A0K are isogenous. Therefore, by Lemma 2.6(2), we
only need to prove the statement of Theorem 1.5 for A0K .
   Proposition 4.1 tells us that ZP(A0K , m, d) follows from ZP(A0K 0 , m, d), where K 0 is an
algebraic closure of Q̄(S).
   If dim S = 0, we have nothing to do. We then assume that S has positive dimension.
   By the inductive hypothesis we know that for all quotients B of A0K 0 by a positive-
dimensional abelian subvariety with K 0 /Q̄-trace (TB , TrB ), the implication

                                ZP(TB , m, d) =⇒ ZP(B, m, d)

holds.
   Note that the K/Q̄-trace of A0K is equal to the base change of the K 0 /Q̄-trace (TA0 0 , TrA0 0 )
                                                                                       K        K
of A0K 0 by Theorem 6.4(3) in [Con06]. If we know that ZP(TA0 0 , m, d) holds, then, for
                                                                    K
all B quotients of A0K 0 , since there exists a homomorphism of algebraic groups with finite
kernel from TB to TA0 0 , ZP(TB , m, d) holds as well because of Lemma 2.6(2).
                      K
   The inductive hypothesis then tells us that ZP(B, m, d) holds for all quotients B of A0K 0
by a positive-dimensional abelian subvariety and thus, by Proposition 3.2, ZP(A0K 0 , m, d)
holds as we wanted to prove.                                                                   

                                 6. Proof of Theorem 1.9

  We show that the hypotheses in Theorem 1.9 imply the following claim for every quotient
A0 of A:

Claim 1. Every subvariety V of A0 of dimension at most m contains at most finitely
many optimal singletons (for V in A0 ) of defect at most d.

   As every quotient of A admits a homomorphism of algebraic groups with finite kernel
to A, we can deduce as in the proof of Lemma 2.6(2) that it suffices to prove Claim 1 for
A itself.
   Let therefore V be a subvariety of A of dimension at most m. We show the following
claim by induction on j ∈ {0, . . . , dim V }:

Claim 2. The optimal singletons for V in A of defect at most d are contained in a finite
union of subvarieties of V of dimension at most dim V − j.
18                               F. BARROERO AND G. A. DILL

   This is obvious for j = 0.
   Suppose that Claim 2 has been proven for some j < dim V . Let W be one of the
finitely many subvarieties of V of dimension at most dim V − j that contain the optimal
singletons for V in A of defect at most d. We can assume without loss of generality that
dim W = dim V − j.
   Any optimal singleton for V in A that is contained in W is also optimal for W in A.
We want to show that the optimal singletons for W in A of defect at most d are contained
in a proper closed subset of W . This will establish Claim 2 for j + 1.
   Translating W by a torsion point sends optimal singletons (for W in A) to optimal
singletons of the same defect, so we can assume without loss of generality that B := hW i
is an abelian subvariety of A.
   If {p} ⊂ W is an optimal singleton for W in A of defect at most d, then h{p}i ⊂ B.
Since dim W = dim V − j > 0, we have that {p} ( W and therefore δ({p}) = dimh{p}i <
δ(W ) = dim B − dim W . It follows that the codimension of h{p}i in B is greater than or
equal to k := max{dim B − d, dim W + 1}. So the optimal singletons for W in A of defect
at most d are contained in W ∩ B [k] .
   As B = hW i, no proper special subvariety of B can contain W . It then follows from
Conjecture 1.8 for B, d, and W that W ∩ B [k] is not dense in W . Together with the above,
this implies that the optimal singletons for W in A of defect at most d are contained in a
proper closed subset of W as desired. This establishes Claim 2 by induction.
   Now taking j = dim V shows that the number of optimal singletons for V in A of defect
at most d is finite. This proves Claim 1. Theorem 1.9 now follows from the following
theorem:

Theorem 6.1. Let m and d be non-negative integers and suppose that every subvariety of
dimension at most m of a quotient of A contains at most finitely many optimal singletons
of defect at most d. Then every subvariety of A of dimension at most m contains at most
finitely many optimal subvarieties of defect at most d.

Proof. The hypotheses imply that after fixing an arbitrary field of definition that is finitely
generated over Q, every quotient of A satisfies LGOdm as defined in Definition 8.1 in [HP16].
Theorem 6.1 then follows from Theorem 9.8(i) in [HP16].                                      


          7. The Zilber-Pink conjecture for subvarieties of defect ≤ 1

Theorem 7.1. Let A be an abelian variety over Q̄ and V ⊂ A a subvariety. Then V
contains at most finitely many optimal subvarieties of defect at most 1.

     The following proof was suggested to the authors by Philipp Habegger.

Proof. Let {p} ⊂ V be an optimal singleton for V in A, contained in a torsion coset of
dimension at most 1. By Proposition 4.5 in [HP16], {p} is geodesic-optimal for V in A
and therefore not contained in a coset of positive dimension that is contained in V . By
the Theorem in [Hab09] with s = dim A − 1, the height of p with respect to any fixed
symmetric ample line bundle on A is then bounded.
           ON THE ZILBER-PINK CONJECTURE FOR COMPLEX ABELIAN VARIETIES                    19

   It then follows from Proposition 9.7 in [HP16] that (in the notation of [HP16]) LGO1 (V )
is satisfied after fixing a number field over which V and A are defined. As V was arbitrary,
this implies that every abelian variety A over Q̄ satisfies LGO1m for all integers m ≥ 0;
see Definition 8.1 in [HP16] for the definitions of LGOd (V ) and LGOdm . The claim then
follows from Theorem 9.8(i) in [HP16].                                                    

                                  Acknowledgements

   We thank Jérémy Blanc, Giulio Codogni, Ziyang Gao, Philipp Habegger, Lars Kühne,
Immanuel van Santen, and Filippo Viviani for relevant and helpful discussions. We thank
Philipp Habegger, Jonathan Pila, and Gaël Rémond for comments on a preliminary version
of this article. This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation as part
of the project “Diophantine Problems, o-Minimality, and Heights”, no. 200021 165525.
The second-named author thanks the Dipartimento di Matematica e Fisica di Roma Tre
for its hospitality during a very productive week spent working with the first-named author
in Rome.

                                       References

[ABD+ 65] M. Artin, J. E. Bertin, M. Demazure, P. Gabriel, A. Grothendieck, M. Ray-
          naud, and J.-P. Serre, Schémas en groupes. Fasc. 2a: Exposés 5 et 6, Séminaire
          de Géométrie Algébrique de l’Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques, vol.
          1963/64, Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques, Paris, 1963/1965.
[BHMZ10] E. Bombieri, P. Habegger, D. Masser, and U. Zannier, A note on Maurin’s
          theorem, Atti Accad. Naz. Lincei Rend. Lincei Mat. Appl. 21 (2010), no. 3,
          251–260.
[BMZ99] E. Bombieri, D. Masser, and U. Zannier, Intersecting a curve with algebraic
          subgroups of multiplicative groups, Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN (1999), no. 20,
          1119–1140.
[BMZ07]           , Anomalous subvarieties—structure theorems and applications, Int.
          Math. Res. Not. IMRN (2007), no. 19, Art. ID rnm057, 33.
[BMZ08]           , On unlikely intersections of complex varieties with tori, Acta Arith.
          133 (2008), no. 4, 309–323.
[Car08]   M. Carrizosa, Problème de Lehmer et variétés abéliennes CM, C. R. Math.
          Acad. Sci. Paris 346 (2008), no. 23-24, 1219–1224.
[Car09]           , Petits points et multiplication complexe, Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN
          (2009), no. 16, 3016–3097.
[Con06]   B. Conrad, Chow’s K/k-image and K/k-trace, and the Lang-Néron theorem,
          Enseign. Math. (2) 52 (2006), no. 1-2, 37–108.
[CV14]    S. Checcoli and E. Viada, On the torsion anomalous conjecture in CM abelian
          varieties, Pacific J. Math. 271 (2014), no. 2, 321–345.
[CVV14] S. Checcoli, F. Veneziano, and E. Viada, On torsion anomalous intersections,
          Atti Accad. Naz. Lincei Rend. Lincei Mat. Appl. 25 (2014), no. 1, 1–36.
[FC90]    G. Faltings and C. Chai, Degeneration of abelian varieties, Ergebnisse der
          Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3) [Results in Mathematics and Related
20                              F. BARROERO AND G. A. DILL

         Areas (3)], vol. 22, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1990, With an appendix by David
         Mumford.
[Gal10]  A. Galateau, Une minoration du minimum essentiel sur les variétés abéliennes,
         Comment. Math. Helv. 85 (2010), no. 4, 775–812.
[Gao17]  Z. Gao, A special point problem of André-Pink-Zannier in the universal family
         of Abelian varieties, Ann. Sc. Norm. Super. Pisa Cl. Sci. (5) 17 (2017), no. 1,
         231–266.
[Gao18a]          , Mixed Ax-Schanuel for the universal abelian varieties and some appli-
         cations, https://arxiv.org/pdf/1806.01408.pdf, 2018.
[Gao18b]          , Generic rank of Betti map and unlikely intersections,
         https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.12929, 2018.
[Gro60]  A. Grothendieck, Éléments de géométrie algébrique. I. Le langage des schémas,
         Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. (1960), no. 4, 5–214.
[Gro65]           , Éléments de géométrie algébrique. IV. Étude locale des schémas et
         des morphismes de schémas. II, Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. (1965),
         no. 24, 5–223.
[Gro66]           , Éléments de géométrie algébrique. IV. Étude locale des schémas et
         des morphismes de schémas. III, Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. (1966),
         no. 28, 5–248.
[GW10]   U. Görtz and T. Wedhorn, Algebraic geometry I, Advanced Lectures in Math-
         ematics, Vieweg + Teubner, Wiesbaden, 2010, Schemes with examples and
         exercises.
[Hab09]  P. Habegger, Intersecting subvarieties of abelian varieties with algebraic sub-
         groups of complementary dimension, Invent. Math. 176 (2009), no. 2, 405–447.
[Har77]  R. Hartshorne, Algebraic geometry, Springer-Verlag, New York-Heidelberg,
         1977, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, No. 52.
[HP16]   P. Habegger and J. Pila, O-minimality and certain atypical intersections, Ann.
         Sci. Éc. Norm. Supér. (4) 49 (2016), no. 4, 813–858.
[HV19]   P. Hubschmid and E. Viada, An addendum to the elliptic torsion anomalous
         conjecture in codimension 2, Rend. Semin. Mat. Univ. Padova 141 (2019),
         209–220.
[Mau08] G. Maurin, Courbes algébriques et équations multiplicatives, Math. Ann. 341
         (2008), no. 4, 789–824.
[MFK94] D. Mumford, J. Fogarty, and F. Kirwan, Geometric invariant theory, third ed.,
         Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (2) [Results in Mathematics
         and Related Areas (2)], vol. 34, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994.
[Mil86]  J. S. Milne, Abelian varieties, Arithmetic geometry (Storrs, Conn., 1984),
         Springer, New York, 1986, pp. 103–150.
[Mum70] D. Mumford, Abelian varieties, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research Stud-
         ies in Mathematics, No. 5, Published for the Tata Institute of Fundamental
         Research, Bombay; Oxford University Press, London, 1970.
[Pin05]  R. Pink, A common generalization of the conjectures of André-Oort, Manin-
         Mumford, and Mordell-Lang, https://people.math.ethz.ch/~pink/ftp/
           ON THE ZILBER-PINK CONJECTURE FOR COMPLEX ABELIAN VARIETIES                      21

           AOMMML.pdf, April 2005.
[Poi01]    B. Poizat, L’égalité au cube, J. Symbolic Logic 66 (2001), no. 4, 1647–1676.
[Poo17]    B. Poonen, Rational points on varieties, Graduate Studies in Mathematics, vol.
           186, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2017.
[Rat08]    N. Ratazzi, Intersection de courbes et de sous-groupes et problèmes de minora-
           tion de hauteur dans les variétés abéliennes C.M, Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble)
           58 (2008), no. 5, 1575–1633.
[Ray83]    M. Raynaud, Sous-variétés d’une variété abélienne et points de torsion, Arith-
           metic and geometry, Vol. I, Progr. Math., vol. 35, Birkhäuser Boston, Boston,
           MA, 1983, pp. 327–352.
[Rém05]   G. Rémond, Intersection de sous-groupes et de sous-variétés. I, Math. Ann.
           333 (2005), no. 3, 525–548.
[Rém07]             , Intersection de sous-groupes et de sous-variétés. II, J. Inst. Math.
           Jussieu 6 (2007), no. 2, 317–348.
[Rém09]             , Intersection de sous-groupes et de sous-variétés. III, Comment. Math.
           Helv. 84 (2009), no. 4, 835–863.
[RV03]     G. Rémond and E. Viada, Problème de Mordell-Lang modulo certaines sous-
           variétés abéliennes, Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN (2003), no. 35, 1915–1931.
[Sil92]    A. Silverberg, Fields of definition for homomorphisms of abelian varieties, J.
           Pure Appl. Algebra 77 (1992), no. 3, 253–262.
[The19]    The Stacks project authors, The stacks project, https://stacks.math.
           columbia.edu, 2019.
[UY11]     E. Ullmo and A. Yafaev, A characterization of special subvarieties, Mathe-
           matika 57 (2011), no. 2, 263–273.
[Via03]    E. Viada, The intersection of a curve with algebraic subgroups in a product of
           elliptic curves, Ann. Sc. Norm. Super. Pisa Cl. Sci. (5) 2 (2003), no. 1, 47–75.
[Via08]              , The intersection of a curve with a union of translated codimension-two
           subgroups in a power of an elliptic curve, Algebra Number Theory 2 (2008),
           no. 3, 249–298.
[Zan12]    U. Zannier, Some Problems of Unlikely Intersections in Arithmetic and Ge-
           ometry, Annals of Mathematics Studies, vol. 181, Princeton University Press,
           2012, With appendixes by David Masser.
[Zil02]    B. Zilber, Exponential sums equations and the Schanuel conjecture, J. London
           Math. Soc. (2) 65 (2002), no. 1, 27–44.

  Università degli studi Roma Tre, Dipartimento di Matematica e Fisica, Largo San Muri-
aldo 1, 00146 Roma, Italy
  E-mail address: fbarroero@gmail.com

  Universität Basel, Departement Mathematik und Informatik, Spiegelgasse 1, CH-4051
Basel, Switzerland
  E-mail address: gabriel.dill@unibas.ch
