                                            WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY

                                                                                JONATHAN LUK

                                           Abstract. We construct a class of spacetimes (without symmetry assumptions) satisfying
                                           the vacuum Einstein equations with singular boundaries on two null hypersurfaces intersect-
                                           ing in the future on a 2-sphere. The metric of these spacetimes extends continuously beyond
                                           the singularities while the Christoffel symbols fail to be square integrable in a neighborhood
                                           of any point on the singular boundaries. The construction shows moreover that the singu-
                                           larities are stable in a suitable sense. These singularities are stronger than the impulsive




arXiv:1311.4970v3 [gr-qc] 5 Oct 2017
                                           gravitational spacetimes considered by Luk-Rodnianski and conjecturally they are present
                                           in the interior of generic black holes arising from gravitational collapse.




                                                                                   Contents
                                       1. Introduction                                                                                       2
                                       1.1. Weak Null Singularities and Strong Cosmic Censorship Conjecture                                  6
                                       1.2. Comparison with Impulsive Gravitational Waves                                                    8
                                       1.3. Description of the Main Results                                                                  9
                                       1.4. Main Ideas of the Proof                                                                         12
                                       1.5. Outline of the Paper                                                                            15
                                       2. Basic Setup                                                                                       16
                                       2.1. Double Null Foliation                                                                           16
                                       2.2. The Coordinate System                                                                           16
                                       2.3. Equations                                                                                       17
                                       2.4. Schematic Notation                                                                              20
                                       3. Norms                                                                                             21
                                       4. Construction of Initial Data Set                                                                  24
                                       5. The Preliminary Estimates                                                                         27
                                       5.1. Estimates for Metric Components                                                                 27
                                       5.2. Estimates for Transport Equations                                                               29
                                       5.3. Sobolev Embedding                                                                               30
                                       5.4. Commutation Formulae                                                                            31
                                       5.5. General Elliptic Estimates for Hodge Systems                                                    32
                                       6. Estimates for the Ricci Coefficients via Transport Equations                                      33
                                       7. Elliptic Estimates for Fourth Derivatives of the Ricci Coefficients                               38
                                       8. Estimates for Curvature                                                                           46
                                       9. Nature of the Singular Boundary                                                                   53
                                       10. Acknowledgments                                                                                  59
                                       References                                                                                           59
                                                                                         1
2                                           JONATHAN LUK

                                          1. Introduction
   In this paper, we study the existence and stability of weak null singularities in general
relativity without symmetry assumptions. More precisely, a weak null singularity is a singular
null boundary of a spacetime (M, g) solving the Einstein equations
                                               1
                                      Ricµν − Rgµν = Tµν
                                               2
such that the Christoffel symbols blow up and are not square integrable while the metric
is continuous up to the boundary. This can be interpreted as a terminal singularity of the
spacetime as it cannot be made sense of as a weak solution1 to the Einstein equations along
the singular boundary. While the singularity is sufficiently strong to be terminal, it is at
the same time sufficiently weak such that the metric in an appropriate coordinate system is
continuous up to the boundary.
   The study of weak null singularities began with the attempts to understand the (in)stability
of the Cauchy horizon in the black hole interior of Reissner-Nordström spacetimes. Reissner-
Nordström spacetimes are the unique two-parameter family of asymptotically flat (with
two ends), spherically symmetric, static solutions to the Einstein-Maxwell equations. Their
Penrose diagrams2 are given by Figure 1. As seen in the Penrose diagram, the Reissner-
Nordström solution possesses a smooth Cauchy horizon CH+ in the interior of the black
hole such that the spacetime can be extended non-uniquely as a smooth solution to the
Einstein-Maxwell system. This feature is also shared3 by the Kerr family of solutions to
the vacuum Einstein equations, which can also be depicted by a Penrose diagram given by
Figure 1. According to the strong cosmic censorship conjecture (see Section 1.1 below), the
Reissner-Nordström and Kerr spacetimes are expected to be non-generic and the smooth
Cauchy horizons are expected to be unstable.
   In a seminal work, Dafermos [7, 8] showed that for a spacetime solution to the spherically
symmetric Einstein-Maxwell-real scalar field system, if an appropriate upper and lower bound
for the scalar field is assumed on the event horizon, then in a neighborhood of timelike infinity,
the black hole terminates in a weak null singularity. The necessary upper bound was shown
to hold for non-extremal black hole spacetimes arising from asymptotically flat initial data by
Dafermos-Rodnianski [10]. In particular, this implies that near timelike infinity, the terminal
boundary of the Cauchy development does not contain a spacelike portion.
   In a more recent work [9], Dafermos showed that if, in addition to assuming the two
black hole exterior regions settle to Reissner-Nordström with appropriate rates, the initial
data are moreover globally close to that of Reissner-Nordström, then the maximal Cauchy
development of the data possesses the same Penrose diagram as Reissner-Nordström. In
particular, the spacetime terminates in a global bifurcate weak null singularity and the
singular boundary does not contain any spacelike portion.
   The works [7, 8, 9] were in part motivated by the physics literature on the instability of
Cauchy horizons, weak null singularities and the strong cosmic censorship conjecture. It will
be discussed below in Section 1.1.
    1One can define a weak solution to the Einstein equations by requiring      Ric(X, Y ) − 12 Rg(X, Y ) −
                                                                             R
                                                                                 M
T (X, Y )dV ol = 0 in the weak sense for all compactly supported smooth vector fields X and Y . After
integration by parts, the minimal regularity required for the spacetime for this to be defined is that the
Christoffel symbols are square-integrable. See the discussion on p.13 of [5].
   2
    for 0 < |Q| < M
   3for 0 < |a| < M
                       WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                        3




                                                              CH+


                                                                       i+


                                                                                I+
                                                                   +
                                                               H




              Figure 1. The Penrose diagram of Reissner-Nordström spacetimes

  While the works of Dafermos [7, 8, 9] are restricted to the class of spherically symmetric
spacetimes, they nonetheless suggest the genericity of weak null singularities in the black
hole interior, at least “in a neighborhood of timelike infinity”. In particular, they motivate
the following conjecture for the vacuum Einstein equations
                                                Ricµν = 0 :                                               (1)
Conjecture 1.       (1) Consider the characteristic initial value problem with smooth char-
      acteristic initial data on a pair of null hypersurfaces H0 and H 0 intersecting on a
      2-sphere. Suppose that H0 is an affine complete null hypersurface on which the data
      approach that of the event horizon of a Kerr solution (with 0 < |a| < M ) at a suffi-
      ciently fast polynomial rate4, then the development (M, g) of the initial data possesses
      a null boundary “emanating from timelike infinity i+ ” through which the spacetime is
      extendible with a continuous metric (see shaded region in Figure 2). Moreover, given
      an appropriate “lower bound” on the H0 , this piece of null boundary is generically a
      weak null singularity with non-square-integrable Christoffel symbols.
  (2) (Ori, see discussion in [9]) If the data for (M, g) on a complete 2-ended asymptotically
      flat Cauchy hypersurface are globally a small perturbation of two-ended Kerr initial
      data (with 0 < |a| < M ), then the maximal Cauchy development possesses a global
      bifurcate future null boundary ∂M. Moreover, for generic such perturbations of Kerr,
      ∂M is a global bifurcate weak null singularity which intersects every futurely causally
      incomplete geodesic.
   If Conjecture 1 is true, then in particular there exist local stable weak null singularities
for the vacuum Einstein equations without symmetry assumptions. We show in this paper
that there is in fact a large class of such singularities, parameterized by singular initial data.
  4In particular, this applies if an asymptotically flat spacetime has an exterior region which approaches a
subextremal Kerr solution at a sufficiently fast polynomial rate. This also holds in the case where the Cauchy
hypersurface has only one asymptotically flat end. In that case, numerical work in spherical symmetry [13]
suggests that the singular boundary may also contain a non-empty spacelike portion, in addition to the null
portion.
4                                          JONATHAN LUK

                                                   i+


                                                            I+
                                            H0
                                   H0



                        Figure 2. Region of existence in Conjecture 1.1

More specifically, we solve a characteristic initial value problem with singular initial data
and construct a class of stable bifurcate weak null singularities.
   To motivate the strength of the singularity considered in this paper, we first recall the
strength of the spherically symmetric weak null singularities in a neighborhood of Reissner-
Nordström studied in [8]. The instability of the Reissner-Nordström Cauchy horizon is in
fact already suggested by a linear analysis (see [4, 20, 23]). For a spherically symmetric
solution to the linear wave equation which has a polynomially decaying (in the Eddington-
Finkelstein coordinates) tail5 along the event horizon, there is a singularity in a (C 0 )-regular
coordinate system near the Cauchy horizon of the strength6
                                                            1
                             |∂u φ| ∼ (u∗ − u)−1 log−p (        ),                             (2)
                                                         u∗ − u
for some p > 1 as u → u∗ . In particular, along an outgoing null curve, ∂u φ is integrable
but not Lq -integrable for any q > 1. In the spacetimes constructed by Dafermos [7, 8], it
was shown moreover that even in the nonlinear setting, ∂u φ is also singular but remains
integrable. A more precise analysis will show that in fact the spherically symmetric scalar
field in the nonlinear setting of [8] also blows up at a rate given by (2).
   Returning to the problem of constructing stable weak null singularities in vacuum, our
construction is based on solving a characteristic initial value problem with singular data. We
will in fact construct spacetimes not only with one weak null singularity, but instead contain
two weak null singularities terminating at a bifurcate sphere. More precisely, the data on
the initial characteristic hypersurface H0 (resp. H 0 ) is determined by the traceless part of
the null second fundamental form χ̂ (resp. χ̂). We consider singular initial data satisfying
in particular
                                                    1
                       |χ̂| ∼ (u∗ − u)−1 log−p (        ), for some p > 1,
                                                 u∗ − u
and
                                                    1
                       |χ̂| ∼ (u∗ − u)−1 log−p (        ), for some p > 1.
                                                 u∗ − u
This singularity is consistent with the strength of the weak null singularities in (2).
   The following is a first version of the main result of this paper (see Figure 3). We refer
the readers to the statement of Theorems 2, 3 and 4 for a more precise formulation of the
theorem.
    5with upper and lower bounds
    6This statement regarding the linear wave equation can be inferred using the methods in [7] for the
nonlinear coupled Einstein-Maxwell-scalar field system.
                       WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                     5

Theorem 1 (Main theorem, first version). For a class of singular characteristic initial data
without any symmetry assumptions for the vacuum Einstein equations
                                               Ricµν = 0
with the singular profile as above (see precise requirements on the data in Section 1.3) and for
 sufficiently small and u∗ , u∗ ≤ , there exists a unique smooth spacetime (M, g) endowed
with a double null foliation (u, u) in 0 ≤ u < u∗ , 0 ≤ u < u∗ , which satisfies the vacuum
Einstein equations with the given data. Associated to (M, g), there exists a coordinate system
(u, u, θ1 , θ2 ) such that the metric extends continuously to the boundary but the Christoffel
symbols are not in L2 .



       Singular boundary {u = u∗ }                    Singular boundary {u = u∗ }




                      H 0 = {u = 0}                    H0 = {u = 0}



                          Figure 3. Region of existence in Theorem 1


Remark 1. This class of stable local weak null singularities that we construct in particular
provides the first construction of weak null singularities of such strength for the vacuum
Einstein equations.7
   Theorem 1 allows singularities on both initial null hypersurface and is valid in the region
where u∗ and u∗ are sufficiently small. In the context of the interior of black holes, this
corresponds to the darker shaded region in Figure 4. The existence theorem clearly implies
an existence result when the data are only singular on one of the initial null hypersurfaces.
In that context, we can in fact combine the methods in this paper with that in [17] to show
that the domain of existence can be extended so that only one of the characteristic length
scales is required to be small. More precisely, we allow that data on H0 such that
                                                     1
                        |χ̂| ∼ (u∗ − u)−1 log−p (        ), for some p > 1,
                                                  u∗ − u
on 0 ≤ u < u∗ ≤ C and the data on H 0 are smooth on 0 ≤ u ≤ u∗ ≤ . Then for  sufficiently
small, the spacetime (M, g) remains smooth in 0 ≤ u < u∗ , 0 ≤ u < u∗ (see for example the
lightly shaded region in Figure 4). We will omit the details of the proof of this result.
   Theorem 1, which proves the existence and stability of the conjecturally generic weak null
singularities, can be viewed as a first step towards Conjecture 1. A next step is an analogue
of [8] for the vacuum Einstein equations without symmetry assumptions, i.e., to solve the
characteristic initial value problem inside the black hole with data prescribed on the event
  7We recall the Birkhoff’s Theorem which states that the only spherically symmetric vacuum spacetimes
are the Minkowski and Schwarzschild solutions. Thus to construct stable examples of weak null singularities
in vacuum, one necessarily works outside the class of spherically symmetric spacetimes.
6                                            JONATHAN LUK

horizon that is approaching Kerr at appropriate rates. This requires an understanding of
the formation of weak null singularities from smooth data on the event horizon (see part
(1) of Conjecture 1). A full resolution of Conjecture 1.2, however, requires in addition an
understanding of the decay rates of gravitational radiation along the event horizon for generic
perturbations of Kerr spacetime. This latter problem is intimately tied to the problem of
the nonlinear stability of Kerr spacetimes, which continues to be one of the most important
and challenging open problems in mathematical general relativity. Nevertheless, significant
progress has been made for the corresponding linear problem in the past decade. We refer
the readers to the survey of Dafermos-Rodnianski [11] for more about this linear problem.


                                                    
                                                             CH+


                                                                      i+

                                                 
                                                                              I+
                                                                  +
                                                              H




                                  Figure 4. Domains of existence

   The approach for the main theorem applies equally well to the Einstein-Maxwell-scalar
field system without symmetry assumptions8. Thus, we show that the weak null singularity
of Dafermos [8], which arises from appropriately decaying data on the event horizon, is stable
against non-spherically symmetric perturbations on the hypersurface Σ sufficiently far within
the black hole region (see Figure 5).

1.1. Weak Null Singularities and Strong Cosmic Censorship Conjecture. The
study of weak null singularities can be viewed in the larger context of Penrose’s celebrated
strong cosmic censorship conjecture in general relativity. The conjecture states that for
generic asymptotically flat initial data for “reasonable” Einstein-matter systems, the max-
imal Cauchy development is future inextendible as a suitably regular Lorentzian manifold.
This would guarantee general relativity to be a deterministic theory.
   As pointed out above, the Kerr and Reissner-Nordström families of solutions (of the Ein-
stein vacuum and Einstein-Maxwell equations respectively) have maximal Cauchy develop-
ments that are extendible as larger smooth spacetimes unless the angular momentum or the
charge vanishes. This is connected with the existence of a smooth Cauchy horizon in the
    8This can be easily seen by decomposing the Maxwell field and the gradient of the scalar field in terms
of the null frame below. The components in this decomposition obey equations that can be put in the same
schematic form as in Section 2.4. Therefore, the Maxwell field and the scalar field and their derivatives
satisfy estimates similar to those for the Ricci coefficients and curvature components.
                       WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                    7




                                                           CH+
                                              Σ




                                                                             I+
                                                                +
                                                            H




         Figure 5. Perturbations in the black hole interior of Dafermos spacetimes

black hole interior such that the spacetime can be extended beyond as a smooth solution.
According to the strong cosmic censorship conjecture, this is expected to be non-generic.
   On the other hand, the situation for the Schwarzschild spacetime is more preferable from
the point of view of the deterministic nature of the theory. The maximal development of
the Schwarzschild spacetime terminates with a spacelike singularity at which the Hawking
mass and the curvature scalar invariants blow up. In particular, the spacetime cannot be
extended in C 2 .
   The early motivation for the strong cosmic censorship conjecture besides the desirability
of a deterministic theory is a linear heuristic argument by Penrose [23] suggesting that the
Reissner-Nordström Cauchy horizon is unstable. This was also confirmed by the numerical
work by Simpson and Penrose [27]. It is thus conjectured that a small global perturbation
would lead to a singularity in the interior of the black hole in such a way that the maximal
Cauchy development is future inextendible.
   However, the nature of the singular boundary in the interior of black holes was not well-
understood9 until the first study of weak null singularity carried out by Hiscock [12]. In
an attempt to understand the instability of the Reissner-Nordström Cauchy horizon, he
considered the Vaidya model allowing for a self-gravitating ingoing null dust. In this model,
an explicit solution can be found and he showed that various components of the Christoffel
symbols blow up. This, however, was called a whimper singularity as the Hawking mass and
the curvature scalar invariants remain bounded.
   In subsequent works, Poisson-Israel [25, 26] added an outgoing null dust to the model
considered by Hiscock. While explicit solutions were not available, they were able to deduce
that the second outgoing null dust would cause the Hawking mass to blow up at the null
singularity. It was then thought of as a stronger singularity than that of Hiscock.
   However, from the point of view of partial differential equations, it is more natural to
view this singularity at the level of the non-square-integrability of the Christoffel symbols,
which is exactly the threshold such that the spacetime cannot be defined as a weak solution

  9In particular, it was believed that a perturbation of the Reissner-Nordström Cauchy horizon would lead
to a Schwarzschild type singularity.
8                                       JONATHAN LUK

to the Einstein equations. From this perspective, the singularity of Poisson-Israel is as
strong as that of Hiscock and both singularities can be viewed as terminal boundaries for
the spacetimes in question.
   While the Christoffel symbols blow up at the Cauchy horizon, one can also think that
the Cauchy horizon is “stable” in the sense that no singularity arises before the “original
Cauchy horizon”. In particular, there is no spacelike portion of the singular boundary in
a neighborhood of timelike infinity. This is thus contrary to the case of the Schwarzschild
spacetime. This weak null singularity picture has been further explored and justified in many
numerical works (see [1, 2, 3]).
   As we described before, the aforementioned picture of the interior of black holes was finally
established by Dafermos in the context of the spherically symmetric Einstein-Maxwell-scalar
field system [7]. This is the main motivation for our present work in which we initiate
the study of weak null singularities of similar strength in vacuum without any symmetry
assumptions.
   Finally, we note that a class of analytic spacetimes with slightly weaker singularities
have been previously constructed in [22]. While this class of spacetime is more restrictive,
as discussed in [22], it nonetheless admits the full “functional degrees of freedom” of the
Einstein equations.

1.2. Comparison with Impulsive Gravitational Waves. As pointed out by Dafermos
[9], the weak null singularities that we consider in this paper share many similarities with
impulsive gravitational waves. The latter are vacuum spacetimes admitting null hypersur-
faces which support delta function singularities in the Riemann curvature tensor. Explicit
examples were first constructed by Penrose [24], Khan-Penrose [14] and Szekeres [28]. In
these spacetimes, while the Christoffel symbols are not continuous, they remain bounded.
Therefore, in contrast with the weak null singularities that we consider here, these impul-
sive gravitational waves are not terminal singularities. In fact, the solution to the vacuum
Einstein equation extends beyond the singularity and is smooth except across the singular
hypersurface. Nevertheless, both scenarios represent singularities propagating along null hy-
persurfaces and from a mathematical point of view, the proofs of the existence theory for
these singularities share many common features.
   In recent joint works with Rodnianski [19, 18], we initiated the rigorous mathematical
study for general impulsive gravitational waves without symmetry assumptions. We con-
structed the impulsive gravitational waves via solving the characteristic initial problem such
that the initial data admit curvature delta singularities supported on an embedded 2-sphere.
One of the new ideas in the proof is the use of renormalized energy estimates for the curva-
ture components, i.e., instead of controlling the spacetime curvature components in L2 , we
subtract off an L∞ correction from some curvature components. This allowed us to derive
a closed system of L2 estimates which is completely independent of the singular curvature
components.
   In [18], when the interaction of impulsive gravitational waves was studied, we also extended
the analysis to include a class of spacetimes such that when measured in the worst direction,
the Christoffel symbols are merely in L2 . We proved an existence and uniqueness theorem for
spacetimes with such low regularity and showed that the spacetime solution can be extended
beyond the singularities. Notice that this result is in fact sharp: This is because if the
Christoffel symbols fail to be square-integrable, the spacetime cannot be extended as a weak
solution to the Einstein equations (see footnote 1).
                       WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                          9

   By contrast, the spacetimes considered in this paper have Christoffel symbols which are10
not in L2 . Even though the weak null singularities are terminal singularities in the sense
that there cannot be an existence theory beyond them, the theory developed in [19, 18] can
be extended to control the spacetime up to the singularity. Moreover, our main theorem,
which allows for two weak null singularities terminating at their intersection, can be viewed
as an extension of the result in [18] on the interaction of two impulsive gravitational waves.
In particular, the renormalized energy of [19, 18] plays an important role in the proof of
our main theorem. However, even after renormalization, the renormalized curvature is still
singular (i.e., not in L2 ) and has to be dealt with using an additional weighted estimate.
1.3. Description of the Main Results. Our setup is the characteristic initial value prob-
lem with initial data given on two null hypersurfaces H0 and H 0 intersecting at a 2-sphere
S0,0 (see Figure 6). We will follow the general notations in [15, 5, 16].

                                                                e3     e4




                                                                  H0        H0


                                                    S0,0

                                     Figure 6. The Basic Setup

  We introduce a null frame {e1 , e2 , e3 , e4 } adapted to a double null foliation (u, u) (see
Section 2.1). Denote the constant u hypersurfaces by Hu , the constant u hypersurfaces by
H u and their intersections by Su,u = Hu ∩ H u . Decompose the Riemann curvature tensor
with respect to the null frame {e1 , e2 , e3 , e4 }:
                      αAB = R(eA , e4 , eB , e4 ),   αAB = R(eA , e3 , eB , e3 ),
                              1                           1
                        βA = R(eA , e4 , e3 , e4 ), β A = R(eA , e3 , e3 , e4 ),
                              2                           2
                              1                         1∗
                         ρ = R(e4 , e3 , e4 , e3 ), σ =    R(e4 , e3 , e4 , e3 ).
                              4                         4
We define also the Gauss curvature of the 2-spheres associated to the double null foliation
to be K. Define also the following Ricci coefficients with respect to the null frame:
                          χAB = g(DA e4 , eB ),     χAB = g(DA e3 , eB ),
                                  1                         1
                          ηA = − g(D3 eA , e4 ), η A = − g(D4 eA , e3 ),
                                  2                         2
                                 1                        1
                          ω = − g(D4 e3 , e4 ),     ω = − g(D3 e4 , e3 ),
                                 4                        4
                                1
                          ζA = g(DA e4 , e3 ).
                                2
Let χ̂ (resp. χ̂) be the traceless part of χ (resp. χ).
  10In fact, we allow initial data to be in Lp only for p = 1, but not for any p > 1.
10                                                    JONATHAN LUK

   The data on H0 are given on 0 ≤ u < u∗ such that χ becomes singular as u → u∗ .
Similarly, the data on H 0 is given on 0 ≤ u < u∗ such that χ becomes singular as u → u∗ .
   More precisely, let f1 : [0, u∗ ) → R be a smooth function such that f1 (x) ≥ 0 is decreasing
and                                     Z u∗
                                                 1
                                                     dx < ∞.
                                          0  f1 (x)2
(resp. let f2 : [0, u∗ ) → R be a smooth function such that f2 (x) ≥ 0 is decreasing and
                                       Z u∗
                                                1
                                                     dx < ∞.)
                                         0   f2 (x)2
                                                                    1
For example, f1 can be taken to be f1 (x) = (u∗ − x) 2 logp ( u 1−x ) for p > 21 .
                                                               ∗
  Our main theorem shows local existence for a class of singular initial data with11
                               |χ(0, u)| . f1 (u)−2 ,         |χ(u, 0)| . f2 (u)−2 .
We construct a (unique) solution (M, g) to the vacuum Einstein equations in the region
u < u∗ , u < u∗ , where u∗ , u∗ ≤ , and
                            Z u∗            Z u∗
                                       −2
                                 f1 (u) du,      f2 (u)−2 du ≤ 2 .                (3)
                                 0                        0
Here, (u, u) is a double null foliation for (M, g) and the metric g takes the form
                 g = −2Ω2 (du ⊗ du + du ⊗ du) + γAB (dθA − bA du) ⊗ (dθB − bB du)
in the (u, u, θ1 , θ2 ) coordinate system (to be defined in Section 2.2). Define also ∇ to be the
induced Levi-Cevita connection on the 2-spheres of constant u and u, i.e., Su,u , and ∇3 , ∇4
to be the projections of the covariant derivatves D3 , D4 to the tangent space of Su,u . Our
main theorem (Theorem 1) can be stated precisely as a combination of Theorems 2, 3 and
4. The first main result is the following theorem, which shows the existence of a spacetime
up to the (potentially singular) null boundaries:
Theorem 2. Consider the characteristic initial value problem for
                                                        Ricµν = 0                                        (4)
with data that are smooth on H0 ∩ {0 ≤ u < u∗ } and H 0 ∩ {0 ≤ u < u∗ } such that
     • There exists an atlas such that in each coordinate chart with local coordinates (θ1 , θ2 ),
       the initial metric γ0 on S0,0 obeys
                                                  d ≤ det γ0 ≤ D,
          and
                                       X               ∂ i1 ∂ i2
                                                 |(       ) ( 2 ) γBC | ≤ D.
                                     i1 +i2 ≤6
                                                      ∂θ1    ∂θ
        • The metric on H0 and H 0 satisfies the gauge conditions
                                           Ω=1            on H0 and H 0
          and
                                                  bA = 0 on H 0 .

     11We assume also bounds for the angular derivatives which are consistent with this singular profile (see
the precise statement in Theorem 2).
                       WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                           11

     • The Ricci coefficients on the initial hypersurface H0 verify
                              X
                                  sup ||f1 2 (u)∇i χ||L2 (S0,u ) ≤ D,
                                          u
                                   i≤5
                                         X
                                               sup ||∇i ζ||L2 (S0,u ) ≤ D,
                                                   u
                                         i≤4
                                     X
                                           sup ||∇i trχ||L2 (S0,u ) ≤ D.
                                               u
                                     i≤4
     • The Ricci coefficients on the initial hypersurface H 0 verify
                              X
                                  sup ||f2 2 (u)∇i χ||L2 (Su,0 ) ≤ D,
                                          u
                                   i≤5
                                         X
                                               sup ||∇i ζ||L2 (Su,0 ) ≤ D,
                                                   u
                                         i≤4
                                     X
                                           sup ||∇i trχ||L2 (Su,0 ) ≤ D.
                                               u
                                     i≤4

Then for  sufficiently small (depending only on d and D) and u∗ , u∗ ≤ , ||f1 (u)−1 ||L2u ,
||f2 (u)−1 ||L2u < , there exists a unique spacetime (M, g) endowed with a double null foliation
(u, u) in 0 ≤ u < u∗ and 0 ≤ u < u∗ , which is a solution to the vacuum Einstein equations (4)
with the given data. Moreover, the spacetime remains smooth in 0 ≤ u < u∗ and 0 ≤ u < u∗ .
Remark 2. In the following, we will only prove a priori estimates for spacetimes arising from
these initial data (see Theorem 5 below). The existence of a spacetime and the propagation
of regularity follow from standard arguments. (For an example of this argument in low
regularity, see Sections 4 and 5 in [19]. See also Chapter 16 in [5].)
Remark 3. In order to simplify notations, we will omit the subscripts 1 and 2 in the weight
functions f1 and f2 . They can be inferred from whether f is a function of u or u.
Remark 4. In Section 4, we will construct a class of characteristic initial data which satisfies
the assumptions of Theorem 2.
  While the weight f in the spacetime norms allows the spacetime to be singular, the space-
time metric can be extended beyond the singular hypersurfaces Hu∗ and H u∗ continuously.
Theorem 3. Under the assumptions of Theorem 2, the spacetime (M, g) can be extended
continuously up to and beyond the singular boundaries H u∗ := {u = u∗ }, Hu∗ := {u = u∗ }.
Moreover, the induced metric and null second fundamental form on the interior of the limiting
hypersurfaces H u∗ and Hu∗ are regular. More precisely, for any coordinate chart Ui on S0,0 ,
the metric components γ, b, Ω satisfy the following estimates in the coordinate chart given
by Ui (u, u) := Φu ◦ Φu (Ui ), where Φu and Φu are the diffeomorphisms generated by L and L
respectively12:
                       X               ∂      ∂
                               sup k( 1 )i1 ( 2 )i2 (γ, b, Ω)kL2 (Ui (u,u∗ )) ≤ C.
                     i +i ≤4
                             0≤u≤u∗   ∂θ     ∂θ
                       1   2


  12See definition of L and L in Section 2.1.
12                                             JONATHAN LUK

Moreover, for any fixed U < u∗ , we have the following bounds for the Ricci coefficients
χ̂, trχ, ω, η, η:
                   X X
                           sup k∇j3 ∇i (χ̂, trχ, ω, η, η)kL2 (Su,u∗ ) ≤ CU .
                                  0≤u≤U
                      j≤1 i≤3−j

Similar regularity statements hold on Hu∗ .
Remark 5. If we assume in addition that the higher angular derivatives of χ are bounded in
L1u L∞ (S), then the metric and the second fundamental form also inherit higher regularity in
the interior of H u∗ . In particular, if all angular derivatives of χ are bounded in L1u L∞ (S),
then the metric restricted to H u∗ ∩ {0 ≤ u ≤ U } is smooth along the directions tangential to
H u∗ . Similar statements hold on Hu∗ . We will omit the details.
  Moreover, we show that if initially the data are indeed singular, then Hu∗ and H u∗ are
terminal singularities of the spacetime in the following sense:
Theorem 4. If, in addition to the assumptions of Theorem 2, we also have the following
for the initial data            Z             u∗
                                                   |χ̂(0, u)|2 du = ∞
                                          0
along Lebesgue-almost every null generator on H0 , then the Christoffel symbols in the coor-
dinate system (u, u, θ1 , θ2 ) do not belong to L2 in a neighborhood of any point on H u∗ .
  Similarly if the initial data satisfy
                                       Z u∗
                                            |χ̂(u, 0)|2 du = ∞
                                          0
along Lebesgue-almost every null generator on H 0 , then the Christoffel symbols in the coor-
dinate system (u, u, θ1 , θ2 ) do not belong to L2 in a neighborhood of any point on Hu∗ .
Remark 6. Theorem 4 guarantees that if we extend the spacetime metric continuously in the
obvious differentiable structure given by the coordinate system (u, u, θ1 , θ2 ), then the Christof-
fel symbols are non-square-integrable in the extension. However, it is an open problem
whether the spacetime admits any continuous extensions with square integrable Christoffel
symbols.
1.4. Main Ideas of the Proof. All the known proofs of regularity for the Einstein equations
without symmetry assumptions rely on L2 estimates on the metric and its derivatives or the
Riemann curvature tensor and its derivatives. Let us denote schematically by Γ a general
Ricci coefficient and by Ψ a general curvature component decomposed with respect to a null
frame adapted to the double null foliation. In the double null foliation gauge (see for example,
[15, 5]), the standard approach to obtain a priori bounds is to couple the L2 estimates for
the curvature components
                            Z         Z                 ZZ
                                 2         2
                               Ψ +       Ψ ≤ Data +          ΓΨΨ
                                  H           H

with the estimates for the Ricci coefficients obtained using the transport equations
                                              ∇3 Γ = Ψ + ΓΓ,
                                              ∇4 Γ = Ψ + ΓΓ.
                        WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                       13

However, in the setting of two weak null singularities, none of the spacetime curvature
components α, β, ρ, σ, β, α are in L2 !
   Nevertheless, while these curvature components are singular, the nature of their singularity
is specific. More precisely, while the spacetime curvature components ρ and σ are not in L2 ,
they can be written as a sum of some regular intrinsic curvature components K and σ̌ (see
further discussion in Section 1.4.1) which belong to L2 and terms which are quadratic in Γ.
We therefore prove L2 estimates for K and σ̌, which we will call the “renormalized curvature
components” (see [19, 18]). Moreover, by considering (K, σ̌) instead of (ρ, σ), we remove
all appearances of α and α in the estimates and so that we do not have to deal with the
singularities of α and α! It still remains to control the singular curvature components β and
β. Here, we make use of the fact that β and β are singular in a specific manner towards the
singular boundary H u∗ and Hu∗ respectively. We therefore introduce degenerate L2 norms
that incorporate these singularities. We will explain the renormalization and the degenerate
estimates in more detail below.
1.4.1. Renormalized Energy Estimates. As described above, a main ingredient of the proof
of the main theorem is the renormalized energy estimates introduced in [19, 18] in the study
of impulsive gravitational waves. This can be seen as follows. For the class of weak null
singularities that we consider, while the L
                                          / L derivative of the spacetime metric blows up, the
metric restricted to the 2-sphere remains regular in the angular directions. Since the Gauss
curvature K is intrinsic to the 2-spheres, it remains bounded. On the other hand, by the
Gauss equation:
                                             1        1
                                 K = −ρ + χ̂ · χ̂ − trχtrχ
                                             2        4
and the fact that trχ and χ̂ blow up at u = u∗ , ρ also blows up at u = u∗ . In view of this,
we estimate the Gauss curvature K instead of the spacetime curvature component ρ.
   Indeed, we see that the Gauss curvature K satisfies equations such that the right hand
side contains terms that are less singular than the terms in the corresponding equation for
ρ. More precisely, for the curvature component ρ, we have (up to lower order terms) the
Bianchi equation
                                    3                  1
                             ∇4 ρ + trχρ = div β − χ̂ · α + ...,
                                    2                  2
which contains the non-integrable curvature component α. On the other hand, the Gauss
curvature obeys the equation (see (12))
                                      ∇4 K + trχK = −div β + ...,
where there are no terms containing α or are quadratic in trχ, χ̂ and ω, i.e. every term on
the right hand side of the equation is integrable in the u direction13.
  In a similar fashion, by considering the renormalized curvature component14
                                                1
                                      σ̌ := σ + χ̂ ∧ χ̂
                                                2
  13The can be compared with the renormalization introduced in [19] and [18], where we estimated ρ̌ =
ρ − 21 χ̂ · χ̂ instead of ρ. Whereas the renormalization using ρ̌ allows one to eliminate α in the estimates,
it nonetheless introduces a term 41 trχ|χ̂|2 , which is not integrable in the u direction in the setting of the
present paper. Instead, by studying the equation for K, we see none of these terms which are quadratic in
trχ, χ̂ or ω! This fact can also be derived directly by considering the equations for ∇4 K using the intrinsic
definition of the Gauss curvature.
   14
     This is in fact related to the intrinsic curvature of the normal bundle to Su,u .
14                                     JONATHAN LUK

instead of σ, we see that it satisfies an equation such that all the terms on the right hand
side are integrable in the u direction.
   One consequence of the renormalization is that we have completely removed the appear-
ances of the curvature component α in the equations. In fact, as in [19, 18], this allows us
to derive a set of estimates for the renormalized curvature component without requiring any
information on the curvature component α.
   Moreover, when considering the equations for ∇3 K and ∇3 σ̌ for the renormalized cur-
vature components, one sees that α does not appear and all the terms are integrable in
the u direction. Therefore, although α or α can be very singular near one of the singular
boundaries, we do not need to derive any estimates for them!

1.4.2. Degenerate L2 Estimates. Since the renormalization above deals with the singularity
in the ρ and σ components and avoids any information on α and α, it remains to derive
appropriate L2 estimates for β and β.
   The main observation is that while β and β are both singular and fail to be in L2 , their
singularities can be captured quantitatively. Consider the curvature component β. Since the
blow up rate of trχ and χ̂ can be bounded above by f (u)−2 , in view of the Codazzi equations
in (10), β is also bounded above by f (u)−2 . In particular, while β is only in L1u but not in
Lpu for any p > 1, the assumptions on the initial data allow us to control f (u)β in L2u . We
will thus incorporate this blow up in the norms and will be able to still use an L2 based
estimate.
   The energy estimates will be obtained directly from two sets of Bianchi equations instead of
using the Bel-Robinson tensor. Notice that since the energy estimates for K, σ̌ are obtained
either together with that for β or that for β, even though K and σ̌ are regular, their energy
estimates degenerate. Therefore, at the highest level of derivatives, we have to contend with
the weaker L2 estimates for these curvature components.
   A potentially more serious challenge is that the introduction of the degenerate weights
in u and u would create terms that cannot be estimated by the energy estimates them-
selves. Nevertheless, since the weights are chosen to be decreasing towards the future, these
uncontrollable terms in fact possess a good sign.

1.4.3. Estimates for the Ricci Coefficients. As indicated above, the Ricci coefficients enter
as error terms in the energy estimates. Thus, to close all the estimates, we need to control
the Ricci coefficients Γ by using the transport equations which in turn have the curvature
components in the source terms. Since the various Ricci coefficients have different singular
behavior, we separate them according to the bounds that they obey. More precisely, denote
by ψH the components that behave like f (u)−2 as u → u∗ ; by ψH the components that
behave like f (u)−2 as u → u∗ ; and by ψ the components that are bounded.
  For the singular Ricci coefficients ψH , we have the following schematic transport equations:
                              ∇3 ψH = K + ∇ψ + ψψ + ψH ψH .
The first three terms on the right hand side of this equation are bounded while the last term
is singular. Nevertheless, the singularity of ψH still allows it to be controlled in L1 along
the e3 direction. Thus, this equation can be integrated to show that the initial (singular)
bounds for ψH can be propagated. It is important that the terms of the form ψH ψH and
ψH ψH do not appear in the equations. A similar structure can also be seen in the equation
                       WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                    15

for the other singular Ricci coefficients ψH , which takes the form
                                  ∇4 ψH = K + ∇ψ + ψψ + ψH ψH .
  For the regular Ricci coefficients ψ, we have transport equations of the form
                             ∇4 ψ = β + ψψH ,       or ∇3 ψ = β + ψψH .
The bounds that we prove show that the right hand side is integrable and therefore ψ remains
bounded. For example, in the ∇4 equation, it is important that we do not have terms of
the form ψH ψH , ψψH , ψH ψH and ψH ψH , which are not uniformly bounded after integrating
along the e4 direction.
1.4.4. Null Structure in the Energy Estimates. A priori, the degenerate L2 estimates that we
introduce may not be sufficient to control the error terms. Nevertheless, the vacuum Einstein
equations possess a remarkable null structure which allows one to close the estimates using
only the degenerate L2 estimates.
   For example, in the energy estimates for the singular component β, we have
              ||f (u)β||2L2 (H) ≤ Data + ||f 2 (u)(βψH β + βψH β + βψK)||L1u L1u L1 (S) .
To estimate the first term, it suffices to note that ψH , while singular, can be shown to be
small after integrating along the u direction. Thus the first term can be controlled using
Gronwall’s inequality. For the second term, since the singularity for β has the same strength
as that for ψH (and similarly the singularity for β has the same strength as that for ψH ),
the singularity in this term is similar to that in the first term and can also be bounded. The
final term is less singular since ψ and K are both uniformly bounded.15 Notice that if other
combinations of curvature terms and Ricci coefficients such as βψH β, βψH β or βψH K appear
in the error terms, the degenerate energy will not be strong enough to close the bounds!
   In order to close all the estimates, we need to commute also with higher derivatives. As in
[19, 18], we will only commute with angular covariant derivatives. These commutations will
not introduce terms that are more singular. Moreover, the null structure of the estimates
indicated above is also preserved under these commutations.
   Similar to [19, 18], the renormalization introduces error terms in the energy estimates such
that the Ricci coefficients have one more derivative compared to the curvature components.
These terms cannot be estimated via transport equations alone but are controlled using also
elliptic estimates on the spheres. A form of null structure similar to that described above
also makes an appearance in these elliptic estimates, allowing all the bounds to be closed.
1.5. Outline of the Paper. We end the introduction with an outline of the remainder of
the paper. In Section 2, we introduce the basic setup of the paper, including the double null
foliation, the coordinate system and the Einstein vacuum equations recast in terms of the
geometric quantities associated to the double null foliation. In Section 3, we introduce the
norms used in the paper and state a theorem on a priori estimates (Theorem 5) which imply
our main existence theorem (Theorem 2). In Section 4, we construct a class of characteristic
initial data satisfying the assumptions of Theorem 2. In Sections 5-8, we prove Theorem
5. In Section 5, we obtain the estimates for the metric components and derive functional
inequalities useful in our setting. Then in Sections 6 and 7, we prove bounds for the Ricci
coefficients assuming control of the curvature components. In Section 8, we close all the
  15Although as pointed out before, the highest derivative estimates for K in the energy norm suffer a loss
as one approaches the singular boundaries, this term can nevertheless be controlled.
16                                            JONATHAN LUK

estimates by obtaining bounds for the curvature components. Finally, in Section 9, we
discuss the nature of the singular boundary and prove Theorems 3 and 4.

                                             2. Basic Setup
2.1. Double Null Foliation. For a smooth16 spacetime in a neighborhood of S0,0 , we define
a double null foliation as follows: Let u and u be solutions to the eikonal equation
                                   g µν ∂µ u∂ν u = 0,    g µν ∂µ u∂ν u = 0,
such that u = 0 on H0 and u = 0 on H 0 . Let
                                  L0µ = −2g µν ∂ν u,     L0µ = −2g µν ∂ν u.
These are null and geodesic vector fields. Let
                                            2Ω−2 = −g(L0 , L0 ).
Define
                                            e3 = ΩL0 , e4 = ΩL0
to be the normalized null pair such that
                                               g(e3 , e4 ) = −2
and
                                           L = Ω2 L0 , L = Ω2 L0
to be the so-called equivariant vector fields.
   In this paper, we will consider spacetime solutions to the vacuum Einstein equations (1)
in the gauge such that
                                   Ω = 1, on H0 and H 0 .
  The level sets of u (resp. u) are denoted by Hu (resp. H u ). The eikonal equations imply
that Hu and H u are null hypersurface. The intersections of the hypersurfaces Hu and H u
are topologically 2-spheres, which we denote by Su,u . Note that the integral flows of L and
L respect the foliation Su,u .

2.2. The Coordinate System. We define a coordinate system (u, u, θ1 , θ2 ) in a neighbor-
hood of S0,0 as follows: On the sphere S0,0 , we have an atlas such that in the local coordinate
system (θ1 , θ2 ) in each coordinate chart, the metric γ is smooth, bounded and positive defi-
nite. Recall that in a neighborhood of S0,0 , u and u are solutions to the eikonal equations:
                                   g µν ∂µ u∂ν u = 0,    g µν ∂µ u∂ν u = 0.
We then require the coordinates to satisfy
                                                  / L θA = 0
                                                  L
on the initial hypersurface H 0 and
                                                  / L θA = 0
                                                  L
     16The spacetimes considered in this paper are not smooth at u = u
                                                                           ∗ or u = u∗ . However, since we first
construct the spacetime in the region {u < u∗ } ∩ {u < u∗ } in which the spacetime is smooth (see Theorem
2), it suffices to define the double null foliation for smooth spacetimes.
                       WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                               17

in the spacetime region. Here, L     / L and L/ L denote the restriction of the Lie derivative to
T Su,u (See [5], Chapter 1) and L and L are defined as in the Section 2.1. Relative to the
coordinate system (u, u, θ1 , θ2 ), the null pair e3 and e4 can be expressed as
                                                     
                                    −1   ∂      A ∂                  ∂
                         e3 = Ω             +b      A
                                                        , e4 = Ω−1 ,
                                         ∂u      ∂θ                 ∂u
for some bA such that bA = 0 on H 0 , while the metric g takes the form
              g = −2Ω2 (du ⊗ du + du ⊗ du) + γAB (dθA − bA du) ⊗ (dθB − bB du).
2.3. Equations. We will recast the Einstein equations as a system for Ricci coefficients and
curvature components associated to a null frame e3 , e4 defined above and an orthonormal
frame17 {eA }A=1,2 tangent to the 2-spheres Su,u . We define the Ricci coefficients relative to
the null fame:
                        χAB = g(DA e4 , eB ),   χAB = g(DA e3 , eB ),
                                1                       1
                        ηA = − g(D3 eA , e4 ), η A = − g(D4 eA , e3 ),
                                2                       2
                               1                      1                                     (5)
                        ω = − g(D4 e3 , e4 ),   ω = − g(D3 e4 , e3 ),
                               4                      4
                              1
                        ζA = g(DA e4 , e3 ),
                              2
where DA = De(A) . We also introduce the null curvature components,
                      αAB = R(eA , e4 , eB , e4 ),   αAB = R(eA , e3 , eB , e3 ),
                             1                             1
                        βA = R(eA , e4 , e3 , e4 ), β A = R(eA , e3 , e3 , e4 ),          (6)
                             2                             2
                             1                          1
                         ρ = R(e4 , e3 , e4 , e3 ), σ = ∗ R(e4 , e3 , e4 , e3 ).
                             4                          4
Here ∗ R denotes the Hodge dual of R. We denote by ∇ the induced covariant derivative
operator on Su,u and by ∇3 , ∇4 the projections to Su,u of the covariant derivatives D3 , D4
(see precise definitions in Chapter 3.1 of [15]).
   Observe that,
                              1                          1
                        ω = − ∇4 (log Ω),          ω = − ∇3 (log Ω),
                              2                          2                                (7)
                        ηA = ζA + ∇A (log Ω), η A = −ζA + ∇A (log Ω).
 Define the following contractions of the tensor product φ(1) and φ(2) with respect to the
metric γ:
                                                    (1)    (2)                                   (1)   (2)
          φ(1) · φ(2) := (γ −1 )AC (γ −1 )BD φAB φCD                for symmetric 2-tensors φAB , φAB ,
                                                          (1) (2)                  (1)     (2)
                       φ(1) · φ(2) := (γ −1 )AB φA φB                 for 1-forms φA , φA ,
                                  (1)   (2)                                          (1)                     (2)
     (φ(1) · φ(2) )A := (γ −1 )BC φAB φC for a symmetric 2-tensor φAB and a 1-form φA ,
                               (1) (2)  (1) (2)                              (1)  (2)
       (φ(1) b
             ⊗φ(2) )AB := φA φB + φB φA − γAB (φ(1) · φ(2) ) for one forms φA , φA ,
                                              (1)    (2)                                         (1)   (2)
          φ(1) ∧ φ(2) := / AB (γ −1 )CD φAC φBD                 for symmetric two tensors φAB , φAB ,
  17Of course the orthonormal frame is only defined locally. Alternatively, the capital Latin indices can be
understood as abstract indices.
18                                           JONATHAN LUK

where / is the volume form associated to the metric γ. We also define by ∗ for 1-forms and
symmetric 2-tensors respectively as follows (note that on 1-forms this is the Hodge dual on
Su,u ):
                                         ∗
                                             φA :=γAC / CB φB ,
                                     ∗
                                         φAB :=γBD/ DC φAC .

Define the operator ∇ b
                     ⊗ on a 1-form φA by

                          (∇⊗φ)
                            b AB := ∇A φB + ∇B φA − γAB div φ.

For totally symmetric tensors, define the div and curl operators as follows

                                (div φ)A1 ...Ar := ∇B φBA1 ...Ar ,

                              (curl φ)A1 ...Ar := / BC ∇B φCA1 ...Ar .
Define also the trace of totally symmetric tensors to be

                            (trφ)A1 ...Ar−1 := (γ −1 )BC φBCA1 ...Ar−1 .

   We separate the trace and traceless part of χ and χ. Let χ̂ and χ̂ be the traceless parts
of χ and χ respectively. Then χ and χ satisfy the following null structure equations:

                             1
                  ∇4 trχ + (trχ)2 = −|χ̂|2 − 2ωtrχ,
                             2
                       ∇4 χ̂ + trχχ̂ = −2ω χ̂ − α,
                             1
                  ∇3 trχ + (trχ)2 = −2ωtrχ − |χ̂|2 ,
                             2
                       ∇3 χ̂ + trχ χ̂ = −2ωχ̂ − α,
                            1                                                            (8)
                  ∇4 trχ + trχtrχ = 2ωtrχ + 2ρ − χ̂ · χ̂ + 2div η + 2|η|2 ,
                            2
                               1                     1
                      ∇4 χ̂ + trχχ̂ = ∇ b⊗η + 2ωχ̂ − trχχ̂ + η b
                                                               ⊗η,
                               2                     2
                            1
                  ∇3 trχ + trχtrχ = 2ωtrχ + 2ρ − χ̂ · χ̂ + 2div η + 2|η|2 ,
                            2
                               1                     1
                      ∇3 χ̂ + trχχ̂ = ∇ b⊗η + 2ω χ̂ − trχχ̂ + η b
                                                               ⊗η.
                               2                     2
The other Ricci coefficients satisfy the following null structure equations:
                              ∇4 η = −χ · (η − η) − β,
                              ∇3 η = −χ · (η − η) + β,
                                                   1     1                               (9)
                              ∇4 ω = 2ωω − η · η + |η|2 + ρ,
                                                   2     2
                                                   1 2 1
                              ∇3 ω = 2ωω − η · η + |η| + ρ.
                                                   2     2
                    WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                       19

The Ricci coefficients also satisfy the following constraint equations



                                 1        1             1
                        div χ̂ = ∇trχ − (η − η) · (χ̂ − trχ) − β,
                                 2        2             2
                                 1        1             1
                        div χ̂ = ∇trχ + (η − η) · (χ̂ − trχ) + β,
                                 2        2             2                            (10)
                                              1
                        curl η = −curl η = σ + χ̂ ∧ χ̂,
                                              2
                                       1      1
                            K = −ρ + χ̂ · χ̂ − trχtrχ,
                                       2      4



with K the Gauss curvature of the spheres Su,u . The null curvature components satisfy the
following null Bianchi equations:



                       1
                ∇3 α + trχα = ∇ b ⊗β + 4ωα − 3(χ̂ρ +∗ χ̂σ) + (ζ + 4η) b
                                                                     ⊗β,
                       2
                ∇4 β + 2trχβ = div α − 2ωβ + (2ζ + η) · α,
                ∇3 β + trχβ = ∇ρ + 2ωβ +∗ ∇σ + 2χ̂ · β + 3(ηρ +∗ ησ),
                       3                  1
                ∇4 σ + trχσ = −div ∗ β + χ̂ ∧ α − ζ ∧ β − 2η ∧ β,
                       2                  2
                       3            ∗     1
                ∇3 σ + trχσ = −div β − χ̂ ∧ α + ζ ∧ β − 2η ∧ β,
                       2                  2                                          (11)
                       3              1
                ∇4 ρ + trχρ = div β − χ̂ · α + ζ · β + 2η · β,
                       2              2
                       3                1
                ∇3 ρ + trχρ = −div β − χ̂ · α + ζ · β − 2η · β,
                       2                2
                ∇4 β + trχβ = −∇ρ +∗ ∇σ + 2ωβ + 2χ̂ · β − 3(ηρ −∗ ησ),
                ∇3 β + 2trχβ = −div α − 2ωβ − (−2ζ + η) · α,
                       1
                ∇4 α + trχα = −∇ b ⊗β + 4ωα − 3(χ̂ρ −∗ χ̂σ) + (ζ − 4η) b
                                                                      ⊗β.
                       2



where ∗ denotes the Hodge dual on Su,u .
  We now rewrite the Bianchi equations in terms of the Gauss curvature K of the spheres
Su,u and the renormalized curvature component σ̌ defined by



                                              1
                                      σ̌ = σ + χ̂ ∧ χ̂.
                                              2
20                                             JONATHAN LUK

The Bianchi equations take the following form
                                                                    1
 ∇3 β + trχβ = − ∇K +∗ ∇σ̌ + 2ωβ + 2χ̂ · β − 3(ηK −∗ ησ̌) + (∇(χ̂ · χ̂) +∗ ∇(χ̂ ∧ χ̂))
                                                                    2
                  3                          1                          3
                + (η χ̂ · χ̂ +∗ η χ̂ ∧ χ̂) − (∇trχtrχ + trχ∇trχ) − ηtrχtrχ,
                  2                          4                          4
       3                                          1             1
∇4 σ̌ + trχσ̌ = − div ∗ β − ζ ∧ β − 2η ∧ β − χ̂ ∧ (∇ b   ⊗η) − χ̂ ∧ (η b ⊗η),
       2                                          2             2
                                               1          1               1       1
∇4 K + trχK = − div β − ζ · β − 2η · β + χ̂ · ∇ b                 ⊗η) − trχdiv η − trχ|η|2 ,
                                                     ⊗η + χ̂ · (η b
                                               2          2               2       2
       3              ∗                          1              1
∇3 σ̌ + trχσ̌ = − div β + ζ ∧ β − 2η ∧ β + χ̂ ∧ (∇⊗η)    b + χ̂ ∧ (η ⊗η),b
       2                                         2              2
                                           1           1              1         1
∇3 K + trχK =div β − ζ · β + 2η · β + χ̂ · ∇⊗η                 b − trχdiv η − trχ|η|2 ,
                                                   b + χ̂ · (η ⊗η)
                                           2           2              2         2
                                                                1
 ∇4 β + trχβ =∇K +∗ ∇σ̌ + 2ωβ + 2χ̂ · β + 3(ηK +∗ ησ̌) − (∇(χ̂ · χ̂) −∗ ∇(χ̂ ∧ χ̂))
                                                                2
                  1                              3                      3
                + (∇trχtrχ + trχ∇trχ) − (η χ̂ · χ̂ −∗ η χ̂ ∧ χ̂) + ηtrχtrχ.
                  4                              2                      4
                                                                                       (12)
Notice that we have obtained a system for the renormalized curvature components in which
the curvature components α and α do not appear.18
  From now on, we will use capital Latin letters A ∈ {1, 2} for indices on the spheres Su,u
and Greek letters µ ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} for indices in the whole spacetime.
2.4. Schematic Notation. We define a schematic notation for the Ricci coefficients ac-
cording to the estimates that they obey. Introduce the following conventions:19
                         ψ ∈ {η, η},     ψH ∈ {trχ, χ̂, ω},     ψH ∈ {trχ, χ̂, ω}.
   We will use this schematic notation only in the situations where the exact constant in
front of the term is irrelevant to the argument. We will denote by ψψ (or ψψH , etc) an
arbitrary contraction with respect to the metric γ and by ∇ψ an arbitrary angular covariant
derivative. ∇i ψ j will be used to denote the sum of all terms which are products of j factors,
such that each factor takes the form ∇ik ψ and that the sum of all ik ’s is i, i.e.,
                                         X
                             ∇i ψ j =            ∇i1 ψ∇i2 ψ...∇ij ψ .
                                                 |       {z       }
                                          i1 +i2 +...+ij =i   j factors

  We will use brackets to denote terms with one of the components in the brackets. For
instance, the notation ψ(ψ, ψH ) denotes the sum of all terms of the form ψψ or ψψH .
  In this schematic notation, the Ricci coefficients ψH satisfy
                                   ∇3 ψH = K + ∇ψ + ψψ + ψH ψH .
The Ricci coefficients ψH similarly obey
                                   ∇4 ψH = K + ∇ψ + ψψ + ψH ψH .
     18Moreover, compared to the renormalization in [19], this system do not contain the terms trχ|χ̂|2 and

trχ|χ̂|2 which would be uncontrollable in the context of this paper.
   19Notice that this definition is different form that in [19] since in the context of the present paper, trχ
and trχ verify different bounds compared to [19].
                      WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                             21

The Ricci coefficients ψ obey either one of the following equations:
                                             ∇3 ψ = β + ψψH
or
                                            ∇4 ψ = β + ψψH .
     We also rewrite the Bianchi equations in the schematic notation:
                                    X                           X
               ∇3 β+∇K −∗ ∇σ̌ =          ψH ψ i1 ∇i2 ψH + ψK +        ψ i1 ψ∇i2 ψ
                                      i1 +i2 =1                                    i1 +i2 =1
                                                           X
                                 ∗                                    i1   i2      i3
                   ∇4 σ̌ + div β =ψH σ̌ + ψ                         ψ ∇ ψ∇ ψH ,
                                                    i1 +i2 +i3 =1
                                                            X
                     ∇4 K+div β =ψH K + ψ                            ψ i1 ∇i2 ψ∇i3 ψH ,
                                                     i1 +i2 +i3 =1
                                                           X                                                  (13)
                   ∇3 σ̌ + div ∗ β =ψH σ̌ + ψ                       ψ i1 ∇i2 ψ∇i3 ψH ,
                                                    i1 +i2 +i3 =1
                                                            X
                     ∇3 K−div β =ψH K + ψ                            ψ i1 ∇i2 ψ∇i3 ψH ,
                                                     i1 +i2 +i3 =1
                                        X                                               X
               ∇4 β−∇K −∗ ∇σ̌ =                   ψH ψ i1 ∇i2 ψH + ψK +                        ψ i1 ψ∇i2 ψ.
                                      i1 +i2 =1                                    i1 +i2 =1


                                                  3. Norms
   In this section, we define the norms that we will use to control the geometric quantities.
We will in particular use the schematic notation defined in Section 2.4. Our norms will be
of the form Lpu Lqu Lr (S), where Lpu and Lqu are defined with respect to the measures du and
du respectively and Lr (S) is defined for any tensors φ on Su,u by
                                         Z                          ! r1
                                                                                        r
                         kφkLr (Su,u ) :=                (φA1 A2 ...An φA1 A2 ...An ) 2        ,
                                                  Su,u

where the integral is with respect to the volume form induced by γ.
  We define the following norms for the Ricci coefficients ψ for p ∈ [1, ∞], i ∈ N:
                                     Oi,p [ψ] := ||∇i ψ||L∞  ∞ p
                                                          u Lu L (S)
                                                                     .                                        (14)
Define the following norms for the Ricci coefficients ψH for p ∈ [1, ∞], i ∈ N:
                                 Oi,p [ψH ] := ||f (u)∇i ψH ||L2u L∞  p
                                                                   u L (S)
                                                                           .                                  (15)
Similarly, we define the following norms for the Ricci coefficients ψH for p ∈ [1, ∞], i ∈ N:
                                 Oi,p [ψH ] := ||f (u)∇i ψH ||L2u L∞  p
                                                                   u L (S)
                                                                           .                                  (16)
As a shorthand, we define the following norm combining all of the norms above:
                     X                  X                    X
            Oi,p :=       Oi,p [ψ] +          Oi,p [ψH ] +          Oi,p [ψH ].
                       ψ∈{η,η}              ψH ∈{trχ,χ̂,ω}                      ψH ∈{trχ,χ̂,ω}


     We make two remarks concerning these norms:
22                                         JONATHAN LUK

Remark 7. While the norms for ψH and ψH are based on L2 in u and u respectively, by
virtueRof the weights f (u) and   f (u), they actually control the L1 norms. More precisely,
       u∗                      u
            1       0               1
                                          du0 < 2 , by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have
                        2
                             R  ∗
since 0 f 2 (u0 ) du <  and  0 f 2 (u0 )


                                 ||∇i ψH ||L1u L∞  p
                                                u L (S)
                                                        ≤ COi,p [ψH ],

and
                                 ||∇i ψH ||L1u L∞  p
                                                u L (S)
                                                        ≤ COi,p [ψH ].

Remark 8. The norm Oi,p [ψH ] (resp. Oi,p [ψH ]) allows us to first take L∞ along the u
direction (resp. u direction) before the L2 norm in u (resp. u) is taken. This is stronger
than the norms such that the order is reversed, i.e., we have

                               ||f (u)∇i ψH ||L∞  2 p
                                               u Lu L (S)
                                                          ≤ COi,p [ψH ],

and
                               ||f (u)∇i ψH ||L∞  2 p
                                               u Lu L (S)
                                                          ≤ COi,p [ψH ].

  In addition to the above norms, we need to define norms for the highest derivatives for
the Ricci coefficients. Let

                Õ4,2 :=||f (u)2 ∇4 trχ||L∞  ∞ 2
                                          u Lu L (S)
                                                     + ||f (u)2 ∇4 trχ||L∞  ∞ 2
                                                                         u Lu L (S)

                        + ||f (u)∇4 (χ̂, ω)||L∞  2 2
                                              u Lu L (S)
                                                         + ||f (u)∇4 (η, η)||L∞  2 2
                                                                              u Lu L (S)
                                                                                             (17)
                        + ||f (u)∇4 (χ̂, ω)||L∞  2 2
                                              u Lu L (S)
                                                         + ||f (u)∇4 (η, η)||L∞  2 2
                                                                              u Lu L (S)
                                                                                         .

Remark 9. Here, note that for the norms for χ̂, ω, η, η, χ̂ and ω, L∞ in u (or u) is taken
after L2 in u (or u). According to Remark 8, this is weaker than the Oi,2 norms defined
above.

Remark 10. Notice that the norms for the fourth derivatives of η and η come with a weight
f (u) or f (u). This is in contrast to the lower order derivatives for η and η, which can
be estimated in L∞    ∞
                   u Lu without any degeneration. The degeneration here arises from the
fact that these higher order derivatives are recovered from the energy estimates for ∇3 K.
These energy estimates for ∇3 K, which are derived simultaneously with the estimates for
the singular components ∇3 β or ∇3 β, have a degeneration either in u or u.

     We also define the curvature norms for the curvature components. For i ∈ N, let

                   Ri :=||f (u)∇i β||L∞  2 2
                                      u Lu L (S)
                                                 + ||f (u)∇i (K, σ̌)||L∞  2 2
                                                                       u Lu L (S)
                                                                                             (18)
                          + ||f (u)∇i (K, σ̌)||L∞  2 2
                                                u Lu L (S)
                                                           + ||f (u)∇i β||L∞  2 2
                                                                           u Lu L (S)
                                                                                      .

As a shorthand, we also let
                                                    X
                                             R :=         Ri .
                                                    i≤3
                        WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                       23

  Finally, let Oini and Rini denote the corresponding norms for the initial data, i.e.
                         X
                 Oini :=     ||∇i ψ||L∞  2
                                      u L (S0,u )
                                                  + ||∇i ψ||L∞  2
                                                             u L (Su,0 )
                               i≤3

                                 + ||f (u)∇i ψH ||L2u L2 (S0,u ) + ||f (u)∇i ψH ||L2u L2 (Su,0 )
                                                                                                       

                              + ||f (u)2 ∇4 trχ||L∞  2
                                                  u L (S0,u )
                                                              + ||f (u)2 ∇4 trχ||L∞  2
                                                                                  u L (Su,0 )

                              + ||∇4 trχ||L∞  2
                                           u L (S0,u )
                                                       + ||∇4 trχ||L∞  2
                                                                    u L (Su,0 )

                              + ||f (u)∇4 (χ̂, ω)||L2u L2 (S0,u ) + ||∇4 (η, η)||L2u L2 (S0,u )
                              + ||f (u)∇4 (χ̂, ω)||L2u L2 (Su,0 ) + ||∇4 (η, η)||L2u L2 (Su,0 )
and
                             X
                      Rini :=   ||f (u)∇i β||L2u L2 (S0,u ) + ||∇i (K, σ̌)||L2u L2 (S0,u )
                                 i≤3

                                 +||∇i (K, σ̌)||L2u L2 (Su,0 ) + ||f (u)∇i β||L2u L2 (Su,0 ) .
                                                                                            

   In order to prove Theorem 2, we will establish a priori estimates for the geometric quan-
tities in the above norms:
Theorem 5. Assume that the initial data for the characteristic initial value problem satisfy
the assumptions of Theorem 2 with  sufficiently small. Then there exists B depending only
on D and d such that           X
                                   Oi,2 + Õ4,2 + R ≤ B.
                                           i≤3

   In the remainder of the paper, we will focus on the proof of Theorem 5 (after constructing
initial data sets in the next section). Standard methods show that Theorem 5 implies
Theorem 2. We will omit the details and refer the readers to [5, 19] for a proof that the a
priori estimates imply the existence theorem.
Remark 11. The assumptions of Theorem 2 imply the boundedness of the following weighted
L2 norms of the curvature components:
                 X                                 X
                     ||f (u)∇i β||L2u L2 (S0,u ) +   ||∇i (K, σ̌)||L2u L2 (S0,u ) ≤ D̃,
                      i≤3                                   i≤3

and                  X                                      X
                            ||f (u)∇i β||L2u L2 (Su,0 ) +         ||∇i (K, σ̌)||L2u L2 (Su,0 ) ≤ D̃,
                      i≤3                                   i≤3

for some D̃ depending only on D and d. These estimates for β, σ̌ and β follow immediately
from the constraint equations on the 2-spheres (see (10)). The bound for K follows after
integrating the null Bianchi equations for K on each of the initial null hypersurfaces (see
(12)).20 In particular, the assumptions of Theorem 2 imply that
                                                 Oini + Rini ≤ D̃.
  20Notice that it is precisely for the initial bound for K that we require an extra derivative for χ on H
                                                                                                             0
(and χ on H 0 ) in the assumptions of the theorem. This is related to the intrinsic loss of derivatives for the
characteristic initial value problem for second order hyperbolic systems (see [21]).
24                                             JONATHAN LUK

                            4. Construction of Initial Data Set
   In this section, we construct initial data sets satisfying the assumptions of Theorems 2 and
4. In particular, we show that the constraint equations can be solved for |χ̂(0, u)| ∼ (f (u))−2
and |χ̂(u, 0)| ∼ (f (u))−2 . Our approach in this section follows closely that of Christodoulou
in Chapter 2 of [5].
   Assume for simplicity that S0,0 is a standard sphere of radius 1. Introduce21 the standard
                                                                             ◦
stereographic coordinates (θ1 , θ2 ) such that the standard metric γ on the sphere takes the
form
                                        ◦          δAB
                                        γ AB =                 .
                                               (1 + 14 |θ|2 )2
   Clearly, it suffices to construct initial data on H0 (with 0 ≤ u < u∗ for u∗ ≤ ). The
                                                                               ∂
construction on H 0 is similar. On H0 , we set Ω = 1 and therefore e4 = ∂u       . We will construct
                              1 2
a metric on H0 in the (u, θ , θ ) coordinates taking the form
                                                                 mAB
                         γAB = Φ2 γ̂AB , where γ̂AB =                                           (19)
                                                             (1 + 41 |θ|2 )2
and det mAB = 1 and Φ S0,0 = 1. In order to ensure that m satisfies det m = 1, we write
                                                 m = exp Ψ,
with Ψ ∈ Ŝ, where Ŝ denotes the set of all matrices taking the form
                                                  
                                           a b
                                                     .
                                            b −a
We will impose upper and lower bounds on Ψ. Since there are no smooth globally non-
vanishing Ψ ∈ Ŝ on the 2-sphere, we use the convention that . denotes that the quantity is
bounded above by a uniform constant, while ∼ denotes that the quantity is bounded above
by a uniform constant, and is bounded below at every (θ1 , θ2 ) by a constant depending on
(θ1 , θ2 ) (where the constant is moreover allowed to vanish at finitely many isolated points).
We require Ψ ∈ Ŝ to satisfy22
             X      ∂ J           X     ∂ J ∂                    ∂
                 |       Ψ| . 1,       |         Ψ| . f (u)−2 , | Ψ| ∼ f (u)−2            (20)
                   ∂θ                    ∂θ ∂u                    ∂u
           |J|≤N                     |J|≤N

for some sufficiently large integer N . Following [5], we have
                                     1      ∂                2 ∂Φ
                             χ̂AB = Φ2 γ̂AB , trχ =               .                                     (21)
                                     2 ∂u                    Φ ∂u
We can also derive that
                                    1                     ∂     ∂
                            |χ̂|2γ = (γ̂ −1 )AC (γ̂ −1 )BD γ̂AB γ̂CD .
                                    4                     ∂u    ∂u
Thus by (20), we have
                                             |χ̂|2γ ∼ f (u)−4 .                                         (22)
  21While we only write down one coordinate chart, it is implicit that we have two stereographic charts - the
north pole chart and the south pole chart. In the following, when we derive the estimates for the geometric
quantities, we only prove the bounds in a sufficiently large ball Bρ in each of these charts.
  22Here and in the rest of this section, we use the notation that J = (j , j ) ∈ (N ∪ {0}) × (N ∪ {0}) is a
                                                                                  1 2
                   ∂ J
multi-index and ( ∂θ ) = ( ∂θ∂ 1 )j1 ( ∂θ∂ 2 )j2 . We moreover denote |J| = j1 + j2 .
                     WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                  25
                                                                                R u∗
In particular, this implies that the requirement in Theorem 4 is satisfied if    0
                                                                                       f (u)−4 du = ∞.
By the equation
                                               1
                                   / ∂ trχ = − (trχ)2 − |χ̂|2 ,
                                   L
                                      ∂u       2
Φ can be solved from the ODE
                      ∂ 2 Φ 1 −1 AC −1 BD ∂             ∂
                          2
                            + ((γ̂ ) (γ̂ )          γ̂AB γ̂CD )Φ = 0.                            (23)
                      ∂u      8                  ∂u     ∂u
We prescribe trχ on S0,0 to obey the initial conditions
                                       ∂Φ          1
                            Φ S0,0 = 1,   S0,0 = trχ S0,0 . 1.                                (24)
                                       ∂u          2
Finally, we prescribe ζ on S0,0 such that
                                   X       ∂ J 2
                                         |       ζ|γ . 1.                                        (25)
                                           ∂θ
                                    |J|≤N −1

We check that these initial data obey all the estimates required by Theorem 2:
Estimates for ∇i χ and the metric
  To satisfy the upper bounds in Theorem 2, we need to show that
                               X
                                   |∇i χ|γ (0, u) . f (u)−2                                      (26)
                                   i≤N

We will show the estimates separately for trχ and χ̂. By (22), (26) holds for χ̂ when i = 0.
To derive this bound for trχ, notice that by the ODE (23) for Φ, the initial conditions (24),
and the bound (22) for |χ̂|2 , we have
                                          1
                                            ≤Φ≤1                                           (27)
                                          2
and                     Z u                            Z u∗
             ∂Φ                 0 −4  0             −2
            | |.1+          f (u ) du ≤ 1 + f (u)           f (u0 )−2 du0 ≤ 1 + 2 f (u)−2
             ∂u           0                             0
                                                                    Ru
for  sufficiently small. In the above estimate, we have used 0 ∗ f (u0 )−2 du0 ≤ 2 . By (21),
we thus have
                                         |trχ| . f (u)−2 .
We now move on to control the angular derivatives of χ. By (20),
                                  X     ∂ J ∂
                                     |          mAB | . f (u)−2 .
                                        ∂θ ∂u
                                  |J|≤N
                                                     ∂
Using this bound and commuting the ODE (23) with ∂θ    , we also have that for up to N
                               ∂
coordinate angular derivatives ∂θ ,
                                    X   ∂ J
                                      |      Φ| . 1.                               (28)
                                        ∂θ
                                      |J|≤N

This implies via (19) and (20) that the metric γ obeys the bounds
                    X      ∂ J            X      ∂ J −1 AB
                        |       γAB | . 1,      |      (γ ) | . 1.                               (29)
                          ∂θ                      ∂θ
                    |J|≤N                      |J|≤N
26                                                JONATHAN LUK

Together with (20) and (21), (28) implies
                                X      ∂ J
                                    |       χ̂| . f (u)−2 .                                  (30)
                                      ∂θ
                                  |J|≤N

By (21), we also have
                                  X           ∂ J
                                          |        trχ| . f (u)−2 .                          (31)
                                              ∂θ
                                  |J|≤N

Finally, we notice that by (29), the angular covariant derivatives of trχ and χ̂ can be con-
trolled by the angular coordinate derivatives of trχ and χ̂. Therefore, (26) follows from (30)
and (31).
Estimates for ∇i K To control ∇i K, we simply notice that by (29), we have
                                      X
                                           |∇i K|γ . 1.
                                              i≤N −2

Estimates for ∇i ζ
  On H0 , since Ω = 1, η = ζ. Thus combining the transport equation for ζ in (9) and the
Codazzi equation for β in (10) and rewriting in L
                                                / (instead of ∇4 ), we have
                                  / ∂ ζ + trχζ = div χ − ∇trχ.
                                  L
                                    ∂u

Recall from (25) that the initial data for ζ and its angular derivatives are bounded. Therefore,
by the estimates for trχ and χ̂ (and their angular derivatives) above, we have
                                        X       ∂ J
                                              |       ζ| . 1.
                                                ∂θ
                                          |J|≤N −1

The bounds for the metric and Christoffel symbols on the sphere imply
                               X
                                    ||∇j ζ||L∞  ∞
                                             u L (S0,u )
                                                         .1
                                   j≤N −1

as desired.
Estimates for ∇i trχ
  Similar to ζ, trχ obeys a transport equations along the null generators of H0 . More
precisely, (9) and the Gauss equation in (10) imply that
                           / ∂ trχ + trχtrχ = −2K − 2div ζ + 2|ζ|2 .
                           L
                             ∂u

Thus, the previous estimates imply
                               X
                                              ||∇j trχ||L∞  ∞
                                                         u L (S0,u )
                                                                     .1
                                  j≤N −2

     Now, combining all the estimates that we have obtained so far, requiring f to satisfy
                                      Z u∗
                                           f (u)−4 du = ∞
                                              0
and taking N to sufficiently large, we have thus constructed initial data set on H0 that obeys
the assumptions of Theorems 2 and 4 on H0 . As mentioned above, it is easy to construct
initial data set analogously on H 0 so that the full set of assumptions of Theorems 2 and 4
are satisfied.
                      WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                27

                                 5. The Preliminary Estimates
  We now turn to the proof Theorem 5, which will form the content of Sections 5-8. In this
section, we derive the necessary preliminary estimates. In Section 6 (see Proposition 15), we
will prove the bound
                                      X
                                         Oi,2 ≤ C(Oini );
                                           i≤3

in Section 7 (see Proposition 25), we will prove

                                         Õ4,2 ≤ C(Oini )(1 + R);

and in Section 8 (see Proposition 32), we will derive the estimate

                                           R ≤ C(Oini , Rini ).

Combining these estimates then imply the conclusion of Theorem 5.
  We now begin with the preliminary estimates. All estimates in this section will be proved
under the following bootstrap assumption:

                                 X               X              X
                                       Oi,∞ +          Oi,4 +         Oi,2 ≤ ∆1 ,              (A1)
                                 i≤1             i≤2            i≤3

where ∆1 is a constant that will be chosen later.


5.1. Estimates for Metric Components. We first show that we can control Ω under the
bootstrap assumption (A1):

Proposition 1. There exists 0 = 0 (∆1 ) such that for every  ≤ 0 ,

                                                 1
                                                   ≤ Ω ≤ 2.
                                                 2
Moreover, Ω is continuous up to u = u∗ and u = u∗ .

Proof. Consider the equation

                                1          1          1 ∂ −1
                           ω = − ∇4 log Ω = Ω∇4 Ω−1 =      Ω .                                  (32)
                                2          2          2 ∂u

Fix u. Notice that both ω and Ω are scalars and therefore the L∞ norm is independent of
the metric. We can integrate equation (32) using the fact that Ω−1 = 1 on H 0 to obtain
                           Z u
      −1
   ||Ω − 1||L∞ (Su,u ) ≤ C     ||ω||L∞ (Su,u0 ) du0 ≤ C||f (u)−1 ||L2u ||f (u)ω||L∞  2 ∞
                                                                                  u Lu L (S)
                                                                                             ≤ C∆1 .
                             0

This implies both the upper and lower bounds for Ω for sufficiently small . To show con-
tinuity, take a sequence of points (un , un , θn1 , θn2 ) such un → u∞ , un → u∞ , θn1 → θ∞
                                                                                          1
                                                                                            and
28                                                     JONATHAN LUK

       2
θn2 → θ∞ . Then
       |Ω−1 (un , un , θn1 , θn2 ) − Ω−1 (um , um , θm
                                                     1    2
                                                       , θm )|
     ≤|Ω−1 (un , un , θn1 , θn2 ) − Ω−1 (un , un , θm
                                                    1    2
                                                      , θm )| + |Ω−1 (un , un , θm
                                                                                 1    2
                                                                                   , θm ) − Ω−1 (un , um , θm
                                                                                                            1    2
                                                                                                              , θm )|
      + |Ω−1 (un , um , θm
                         1    2
                           , θm  ) − Ω−1 (um , um , θm  1    2
                                                          , θm )|
                                                             Z um
     ≤C||∇ log Ω||L∞ (Sun ,un ) distSun ,un (θn , θm ) + 2|       ||ω||L∞ (Sun ,u0 ) du0 |
                                                               un
           Z um
      + 2|      ||ω||L∞ (Su0 ,u ) du0 |.
                                     m
               un

Since by the bootstrap assumption (A1), ∇ log Ω = 12 (η+η) is uniformly bounded, ||ω||L∞ (Su,u )
is uniformly integrable in u for all u and ||ω||L∞ (Su,u ) is uniformly integrable in u for all u,
the right hand side can be made arbitrarily small by taking n, m ≥ N for N sufficiently
large. The conclusion thus follows.                                                             
     We then show that we can control γ under the bootstrap assumption (A1):
Proposition 2. There exists 0 = 0 (∆1 ) such that for  ≤ 0 , in the (u, u, θ1 , θ2 ) coordinate
system, we have
                          c ≤ det γ ≤ C, |γAB |, |(γ −1 )AB | ≤ C,
where the constants depend only on d and D. Moreover, γ remains continuous up to u = u∗
and u = u∗ .
Proof. We first prove the bound for γ on the initial hypersurface H 0 . Using
                                                       L
                                                       / L γ = 2Ωχ,
we get23
                           ∂                                     ∂
                             γAB = 2ΩχAB ,                          log(det γ) = Ωtrχ
                         ∂u                                      ∂u
on H 0 . We therefore have
                                                     Z u
                               det γ(u, 0)
                             |             | ≤ C exp(    |trχ|(u0 , 0) du0 ) ≤ C(D).                                (33)
                               det γ(0, 0)            0
This implies that the det γ is bounded above and below. Let Λ be the larger eigenvalue of
γ. Clearly,                              X
                  Λ ≤ C sup |γAB |,           |χAB |2 ≤ CΛ2 ||χ||2L∞ (Su,u ) .       (34)
                                     A,B=1,2
                                                        A,B=1,2
Then
                                                        Z u
                                                                                         1
     |γAB (u, 0) − (γ)AB (0, 0)| ≤ C(sup Λ)(                 f (u0 )2 ||χ||2L∞ (Su0 ,0 ) du0 ) 2 ≤ C(D)(sup Λ).   (35)
                                               u0 ≤u     0                                            u0 ≤u

Using the first upper bound in (34), we thus obtain the upper bound for |γAB | after choosing
 to be sufficiently small. The upper bound for |(γ −1 )AB | follows from the upper bound for
|γAB | and the lower bound for det γ.
   Now, in order to obtain the bounds for γAB in the spacetime, we argue similarly but using
the propagation equation in the u direction and compare γ(u, u) with γ(u, 0). Here, we use
     23Note that bA = 0 on H .
                                 0
                    WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                  29

bootstrap assumption (A1) instead of the assumptions on the initial data. More precisely,
we have
                            ∂                 ∂
                              γAB = 2ΩχAB ,      log(det γ) = Ωtrχ.                 (36)
                           ∂u                ∂u
We then derive as above that
            det γ(u, u)
          |             | ≤ C exp(C∆1 ), |γAB (u, u) − γAB (u, 0)| ≤ C(sup Λ)∆1 ,
            det γ(u, 0)                                                 u0 ≤u
                                                                                         u0 ≤u

where Λ is the larger eigenvalue for γAB . As before, we thus obtain the upper bounds for
|γAB | and |(γ −1 )AB |. Finally, the continuity of γ up to the boundary follows as in the proof
of continuity for Ω in Proposition 1.                                                         
  With the estimates on γ, it follows that the Lp norms defined with respect to the metric
and the Lp norms defined with respect to the coordinate system are equivalent.
Proposition 3. Given a covariant tensor φA1 ...Ar on Su,u , we have
                  Z                X ZZ                   p
                             p/2
                       hφ, φiγ ∼             |φA1 ...Ar |p det γdθ1 dθ2 .
                       Su,u              Ai =1,2

 We can also bound b under the bootstrap assumption, thus controlling the full spacetime
metric:
Proposition 4. In the coordinate system (u, u, θ1 , θ2 ),
                                            |bA | ≤ C∆1 .
Moreover, bA is continuous up to u = u∗ and u = u∗ .
Proof. bA satisfies the equation
                                           ∂bA
                                               = −4Ω2 ζ A .                                      (37)
                                           ∂u
This can be derived from
                                             ∂bA ∂
                                         [L, L] =      .
                                             ∂u ∂θA
Now, integrating (37) and using Proposition 3 gives the bound on b. Continuity of b up to
the boundary follows as in the proof of Proposition 1.                                 
5.2. Estimates for Transport Equations. In this subsection, we prove general propo-
sitions for obtaining bounds from the covariant null transport equations. Such estimates
require the integrability of trχ and trχ, which is consistent with our bootstrap assumption
(A1). This will be used in the following sections to derive some estimates for the Ricci co-
efficients and the null curvature components from the null structure equations and the null
Bianchi equations respectively. Below, we state two propositions which provide Lp estimates
for general quantities satisfying transport equations either in the e3 or e4 direction.
Proposition 5. There exists 0 = 0 (∆1 ) such that for all  ≤ 0 and for every 2 ≤ p < ∞,
we have                                          Z u
                   ||φ||Lp (Su,u ) ≤ C(||φ||Lp (Su,u0 ) +        ||∇4 φ||Lp (Su,u00 ) du00 ),
                                                            u0
30                                                 JONATHAN LUK
                                                                     Z u
                         ||φ||Lp (Su,u ) ≤ C(||φ||Lp (Su0 ,u ) +             ||∇3 φ||Lp (Su00 ,u ) du00 )
                                                                       u0
for any tensor φ tangential to the spheres Su,u .
Proof. The following identity24 holds for any scalar f :
                                Z         Z
                             ∂
                                     f=         Ω (e4 (f ) + trχf ) .
                            ∂u Su,u        Su,u

Similarly, we have                       Z              Z
                                    ∂                                          
                                                 f=            Ω e3 (f ) + trχf .
                                    ∂u    Su,u          Su,u
Hence, taking f = |φ|pγ , we have
                                                 Z uZ                               
                                                                            1
           ||φ||pLp (Su,u ) =||φ||pLp (S 0 ) +           p|φ| Ω hφ, ∇4 φiγ + trχ|φ|γ du00 ,
                                                                     p−2           2
                                        u,u
                                              u0 Su,u00                     p
                                             Z uZ                                                             (38)
                p                p                                          1
           ||φ||Lp (Su,u ) =||φ||Lp (S 0 ) +             p|φ| Ω hφ, ∇3 φiγ + trχ|φ|γ du00 .
                                                             p−2                   2
                                      u ,u
                                              u0 Su00 ,u                    p
The bootstrap assumption (A1) implies that trχ and trχ are integrable (and in fact it also
implies that ||trχ||L1u L∞  ∞
                         u L (S)
                                 and ||trχ||L1u L∞  ∞
                                                 u L (S)
                                                         are small after choosing  to be small
depending on ∆1 ). Thus the proposition can be proved by using Hölder’s inequality and
Gronwall’s inequality, together with the bound for Ω given in Proposition 1.                 
  We also have the following bounds for the p = ∞ case by integrating along the integral
curves of e3 and e4 :
Proposition 6. There exists 0 = 0 (∆1 ) such that for all  ≤ 0 , we have
                                                     Z u                           
                                                                                 00
               ||φ||L∞ (Su,u ) ≤ C ||φ||L∞ (Su,u0 ) +     ||∇4 φ||L∞ (Su,u00 ) du
                                                                        u0
                                                                     Z u                                   
                                                                                                       00
                      ||φ||L∞ (Su,u ) ≤ C ||φ||L∞ (Su0 ,u ) +                ||∇3 φ||L∞ (Su00 ,u ) du
                                                                        u0
for any tensor φ tangential to the spheres Su,u .
Proof. This follows simply from integrating along the integral curves of L and L, and the
estimate on Ω in Proposition 1.                                                        
5.3. Sobolev Embedding. Using the estimates for the metric γ in Proposition 2, we have
the following Sobolev embedding theorem:
Proposition 7. There exists 0 = 0 (∆1 ) such that as long as  ≤ 0 , we have
                                                            1
                                                            X
                                      ||φ||L4 (Su,u ) ≤ C            ||∇i φ||L2 (Su,u )
                                                               i=0
and                                                                                              
                              ||φ||L∞ (Su,u ) ≤ C ||φ||L2 (Su,u ) + ||∇φ||L4 (Su,u )
     24Here, ∂   on the left hand side is to be understood as the coordinate vector field in the (u, u)-plane.
            ∂u
               ∂
Similarly for ∂u below.
                       WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                          31

for any tensor φ tangential to the spheres Su,u . Combining the above estimates, we also have
                                                           2
                                                           X
                                     ||φ||L∞ (Su,u ) ≤ C         ||∇i φ||L2 (Su,u ) .
                                                           i=0

Proof. By (35) in the proof of Proposition 2, |γAB (u, u) − γAB (0, 0)| can be made arbitrarily
small by choosing  to be small. Therefore, the isoperimetric constant
                                                     min{Area(U ), Area(U c )}
                                I(Su,u ) = sup
                                                 U       Perimeter(∂U )
                                         25
on every sphere Su,u is controlled up to a constant factor by the corresponding isoperimetric
constant on S0,0 . Once the isoperimetric constants are uniformly controlled, the Sobolev
embedding theorem follows from Lemmas 5.1 and 5.2 in [5] and the fact that the volume of
Su,u is bounded uniformly above and below.                                                 
5.4. Commutation Formulae. We have the following formula from Lemma 7.3.3 in [6]:
Proposition 8. The commutator [∇4 , ∇] acting on a rank r tensor φ tangential to the
spheres Su,u is given by
    [∇4 , ∇B ]φA1 ...Ar =(∇B log Ω)∇4 φA1 ...Ar − (γ −1 )CD χBD ∇C φA1 ...Ar
                            r
                            X
                          +    ((γ −1 )CD χAi B η D − (γ −1 )CD χBD η A + / Ai C ∗ βB )φA1 ...Âi C...Ar .
                                                                                    i
                               i=1

Similarly, the commutator [∇3 , ∇] is given by
    [∇3 , ∇B ]φA1 ...Ar =(∇B log Ω)∇3 φA1 ...Ar − (γ −1 )CD χBD ∇C φA1 ...Ar
                            r
                            X
                          +    ((γ −1 )CD χA B ηD − (γ −1 )CD χBD ηAi − / Ai C ∗ β B )φA1 ...Âi C...Ar .
                                                     i
                               i=1

  Recall the schematic notation
                        ψ ∈ {η, η},           ψH ∈ {trχ, χ̂, ω},        ψH ∈ {trχ, χ̂, ω}.
By induction and the schematic Codazzi equations
                β = ∇χ + ψχ = ∇ψH + ψψH ,                    β = ∇χ + ψχ = ∇ψH + ψψH ,
we get the following schematic formula for repeated commutations (see [19]):
Proposition 9. Suppose ∇4 φ = F0 for some tensors φ and F0 . Let Fi be the tensor defined
by ∇4 ∇i φ = Fi . Then
                       X                     X
                 Fi ∼      ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 F0 +         ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 φ.
                         i1 +i2 +i3 =i                     i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =i

Similarly, suppose ∇3 φ = G0 for some tensors φ and G0 . Let Gi be the tensor defined by
∇3 ∇i φ = Gi . Then
                        X                      X
                Gi ∼         ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 G0 +       ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 φ.
                         i1 +i2 +i3 =i                     i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =i

  25This argument is standard. We refer the readers for instance to Lemma 5.4 in [5].
32                                                  JONATHAN LUK

5.5. General Elliptic Estimates for Hodge Systems. We recall the definition of the
divergence and curl of a symmetric covariant tensor of rank r + 1:
                                          (div φ)A1 ...Ar = ∇B φBA1 ...Ar ,

                                       (curl φ)A1 ...Ar = / BC ∇B φCA1 ...Ar ,
where / is the volume form associated to the metric γ. Recall also that the trace is defined
to be
                                   (trφ)A1 ...Ar−1 = (γ −1 )BC φBCA1 ...Ar−1 .
The following elliptic estimate is standard (see for example Lemmas 2.2.2, 2.2.3 in [6] or
Lemmas 7.1, 7.2, 7.3 in [5]):
Proposition 10. Let φ be a symmetric r covariant tensor on a 2-sphere (S2 , γ) satisfying
                                       div φ = f,     curl φ = g,     trφ = h.
Suppose also that
                                             X
                                                    ||∇i K||L2 (S) < ∞.
                                              i≤2
                                                                              X
Then for i ≤ 4, there exists a constant CE depending only on                            ||∇i K||L2 (S) such that
                                                                                  i≤2

                             i−1
                             X
          i
       ||∇ φ||L2 (S)   ≤ CE ( (||∇j f ||L2 (S) + ||∇j g||L2 (S) + ||∇j h||L2 (S) + ||∇j φ||L2 (S) )).
                                 j=0

  For the special case that φ is a symmetric traceless 2-tensor, we only need to know its
divergence:
Proposition 11. Suppose φ is a symmetric traceless 2-tensor satisfying
                                                      div φ = f.
Suppose moreover that
                                             X
                                                    ||∇i K||L2 (S) < ∞.
                                              i≤2
                                                                              X
Then for i ≤ 4, there exists a constant CE depending only on                            ||∇i K||L2 (S) such that
                                                                                  i≤2

                                             i−1
                                             X
                             i
                         ||∇ φ||L2 (S) ≤ CE ( (||∇j f ||L2 (S) + ||∇j φ||L2 (S) )).
                                                    j=0

Proof. This follows from Proposition 10 and the fact that
                                                     curl φ =∗ f.
                                                                                                                   
                      WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                 33

       6. Estimates for the Ricci Coefficients via Transport Equations
  In this section, we prove L2 estimates for the Ricci coefficients and their first, second and
third derivatives. XWe will assume bounds for R and Õ4,2 and show that for 0 chosen to be
sufficiently small,    Oi,2 is likewise bounded. In order to achieve this, we continue to work
                    i≤3
under the bootstrap assumption (A1) and will show that the constant in (A1) can in fact be
improved (see Proposition 15).
  Recall that we will use the following notation: ψ ∈ {η, η}, ψH ∈ {trχ, χ̂, ω} and ψH ∈
{trχ, χ̂, ω}.
  We first show bounds for ψ.

Proposition 12. Assume
                                                    R < ∞.

Then there exists 0 = 0 (∆1 , R) such that whenever  ≤ 0 ,
                                           X
                                                 Oi,2 [ψ] ≤ C(Oini ),
                                           i≤3


i.e., the bounds depends only on the initial data norm Oini . In particular, C(Oini ) is inde-
pendent of ∆1 .

Proof. We first estimate η, the estimates for η are similar after we replace u with u and 3
with 4. Using the null structure equations, we have a schematic equation of the type

                                              ∇4 η = β + ψH ψ.

We also commute the null structure equations with angular derivatives to get
                         X                       X
            ∇4 ∇i η =          ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 β +         ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 ψH .                    (39)
                           i1 +i2 +i3 =i                   i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =i


  By Proposition 5, in order to estimate ||∇i η||L∞        ∞ 2
                                                       u Lu L (S)
                                                                  , it suffices to estimate the initial
data and the ||·||L∞  1 2
                   u Lu L (S)
                              norm of the right hand side (39). Using the bootstrap assumption,
we will show that the right hand side is bounded in a weighted L2u norm. This in turns imply
via an application of the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality that the L1u norm is also bounded. We
now turn to the details.
  We first estimate the curvature term
                                         X
                                                 ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 β.
                                           i1 +i2 +i3 ≤3


For the terms such that
                     Xat most 1 derivative falling on ψ, the bootstrap assumption
                                                                            X (A1)
                          i
allows us to control    k∇ ψkL∞  ∞ ∞
                              u Lu L (S)
                                         by ∆1 . We then need to control        ∇i β in
                          i≤1                                                              i≤3
L∞  1 2                                                   2
 u Lu L (S). By the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, since the Lu norm of f (u)
                                                                         −1
                                                                            is smaller
34                                                             JONATHAN LUK
                                                X
than , we can bound this by                           ∇i β in the weighted L2 norms. More precisely, we have
                                                 i≤3




                 X
       ||                       ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 β||L∞  1 2
                                                 u Lu L (S)
            i1 ≤1,i2 ≤3,i3 ≤3
                X                                             X
     ≤C(                   ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  ∞ ∞
                                       u Lu L (S)
                                                  )(                  ||f (u)∇i3 β||L∞  1 2
                                                                                     u Lu L (S)
                                                                                                )
             i1 ≤1,i2 ≤3                                      i3 ≤3                                               (40)
                X                                             X
     ≤C(            ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  ∞ ∞
                                u Lu L (S)
                                           )(      ||f (u)∇i3 β||L∞  2 2
                                                                  u Lu L (S)
                                                                             )||f (u)−1 ||L∞  2 ∞
                                                                                           u Lu L (S)
        i1 ≤1,i2 ≤3                          i3 ≤3

     ≤C(1 + ∆1 )3 R.




For the term where exactly 2 derivatives fall on ψ (notice that this is the highest number of
derivatives that can fall on ψ), we control ∇2 ψ in L∞     ∞ 2
                                                        u Lu L (S) by ∆1 (using (A1)). Thus
we are left with β in L∞      1 ∞
                          u Lu L (S). By Sobolev embedding (Proposition 7), this can be
             X
bounded by       k∇i βkL∞   1 2
                         u Lu L (S)
                                    , which in turn can be controlled by R after applying the
                  i≤3
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality as in (40). More precisely,




                    ||∇2 ψβ||L∞  1 2
                              u Lu L (S)

                  ≤C||∇2 ψ||L∞  ∞ 2
                             u Lu L (S)
                                        ||β||L∞   1 ∞
                                               u Lu L (S)
                                          X
                  ≤C||∇2 ψ||L∞  ∞ 2
                             u Lu L (S)
                                        (     ||∇i β||L∞  1 2
                                                       u Lu L (S)
                                                                  )
                                                        i≤2                                                       (41)
                                                        X
                  ≤C||∇2 ψ||L∞  ∞ 2
                             u Lu L (S)
                                        (                     ||f (u)∇i β||L∞  2 ∞
                                                                            u Lu L (S)
                                                                                       )||f (u)−1 ||L∞  2 ∞
                                                                                                     u Lu L (S)
                                                        i≤2
                  ≤C∆1 R.




Combining (40) and (41), we have



                                         X
                                ||                   ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 β||L∞  1 2
                                                                      u Lu L (S)
                                                                                 ≤ C(1 + ∆1 )3 R.
                                     i1 +i2 +i3 ≤3
                          WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                                       35

We then estimate the second term in (39). We separate the terms where more derivatives
fall on ψH and those where more derivatives fall on ψ:
                X
          ||           ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 ψH ||L∞  1 2
                                               u Lu L (S)
               i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤3
                     X                                           X
         ≤C(                    ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  ∞ ∞
                                            u Lu L (S)
                                                       )(                ||∇i3 ψH ||L∞  1 2
                                                                                     u Lu L (S)
                                                                                                )
                i1 ≤1,1≤i2 ≤4                                    i3 ≤3
                                                      X                                  X
              + C(1 + ||ψ||L∞  ∞ ∞
                            u Lu L (S)
                                       )(                     ||∇i1 ψ||L∞  ∞ 2
                                                                        u Lu L (S)
                                                                                   )(            ||∇i2 ψH ||L∞  1 ∞
                                                                                                             u Lu L (S)
                                                                                                                        )
                                                      i1 ≤3                              i2 ≤1
                                       X                                    X                                               (42)
         ≤C∆1 (1 + ∆1 )3 (                   ||∇i ψH ||L∞  1 2
                                                        u Lu L (S)
                                                                   +              ||∇i ψH ||L∞  1 ∞
                                                                                             u Lu L (S)
                                                                                                        )
                                       i≤3                                  i≤1
                                   3          −1
         ≤C∆1 (1 + ∆1 ) ||f (u) ||L∞     2 ∞
                                     u Lu L (S)
            X                                  X
          ×(     ||f (u)∇i ψH ||L∞
                                 u L2 L2 (S) +
                                    u
                                                 ||f (u)∇i ψH ||L∞  2 ∞
                                                                 u Lu L (S)
                                                                            )
                  i≤3                                            i≤1

         ≤C∆21 (1 + ∆1 )3 .

Hence, by Proposition 5, we have
       X
           ||∇i η||L∞  ∞ 2
                    u Lu L (S)
                               ≤ C(Oini ) + C(∆21 (1 + ∆1 )3 + R(1 + ∆1 )3 ) ≤ C(Oini ),
        i≤3

after choosing  to be sufficiently small. Similarly, we consider the equation for ∇3 ∇i η to
get
                               X
                                   ||∇i η||L∞  ∞ 2
                                            u Lu L (S)
                                                       ≤ C(Oini ).
                                              i≤3

                                                                                                                              

   We now move to the terms that we denote by ψH , i.e., trχ, χ̂ and ω. All of them obey a ∇4
equation. Unlike the previous estimates for ψ, the initial data for the quantities ψH are not
in L∞
    u . We will therefore prove only a bound for ψH in the weighted norm ||f (u)·||L2u L∞  ∞
                                                                                        u L (S)
                                                                                                .

Proposition 13. Assume
                                                    R < ∞,             Õ4,2 < ∞.
Then there exists 0 = 0 (∆1 , R, Õ4,2 ) such that whenever  ≤ 0 ,
                                     X
                                           Oi,2 [ψH ] ≤ C(Oini ).
                                                    i≤3

In particular, as before, this estimate is independent of ∆1 .

Proof. According to the definition of the Oi,2 norm, we need to control the weighted L2u L∞  2
                                                                                          u L (S)
norm of ψH . Using the null structure equations, for each ψH ∈ {trχ, χ̂, ω}, we have an equa-
tion of the type
                                             ∇4 ψH = K + ∇η + ψψ + ψH ψH .
36                                                         JONATHAN LUK

We also use the null structure equations commuted with angular derivatives:

                                 X                                                     X
          ∇4 ∇i ψH =                       ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 (K + ∇η) +                                 ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 ψ
                          i1 +i2 +i3 =i                                        i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =i
                                      X
                                                          i1   i2   i3   i4
                          +                           ∇ ψ ∇ ψH ∇ ψH .
                                 i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =i



We estimate the curvature term using the curvature norm. Recall that the curvature norm for
K along the Hu is weighted with f (u). Using the Sobolev embedding theorem in Proposition
7, we have

                          X
                ||                    ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 K||L1u L2 (S)
                     i1 +i2 +i3 ≤3
                                        X                                    X
              ≤Cf (u)−1 (                         ||∇i1 ψ||iL22u L∞ (S) )(       ||f (u)∇i3 K||L2u L2 (S) )
                                    i1 ≤1,i2 ≤3                          i3 ≤3
                                   −1       2
               + Cf (u) ||∇ ψ||L2u L4 (S) ||f (u)K||L2u L4 (S)                                                           (43)
                  1
                              X                            X
              ≤C 2 f (u)−1 (   ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  u L2 (S) )(   ||f (u)∇i3 K||L2u L2 (S) )
                                        i1 ≤3,i2 ≤3                            i3 ≤3
                      1
              ≤C f (u)−1 (1 + ∆1 )3 R.
                      2




The term linear in ∇4 η can be estimated analogously but using the Õ4,2 norms instead of
the R norms:

                           X
                 ||                     ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 +1 η||L1u L2 (S)
                      i1 +i2 +i3 ≤3
                                                                         1
                          XX
               ≤C(                     ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  2
                                                    u L (S)
                                                            ) + C 2 f (u)−1 ||f (u)∇4 η||L2u L2 (S)                     (44)
                          i1 ≤3 i2 ≤4
                                                      1
               ≤C(1 + ∆1 )4 + C 2 f (u)−1 Õ4,2 .


We now move to control the terms that are nonlinear in the Ricci coefficients. First, we
estimate the terms without ψH or ψH :

                                        X
                            ||                        ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 ψ||L1u L2 (S)
                                 i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤3
                                        X                                    X
                          ≤C(                    ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  ∞
                                                              u L (S)
                                                                      )(             ||∇i3 ψ||L∞  2
                                                                                               u L (S)
                                                                                                       )                 (45)
                                    i1 ≤1,i2 ≤4                              i3 ≤3
                                                  5
                          ≤C(1 + ∆1 ) .
                                    WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                              37

We then control the term with both ψH and ψH :
      X
 ||           ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψH ||L1u L2 (S)
    i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤3
        X                                       X                                  X
≤C(                ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  ∞
                               u L (S)
                                       )(               ||∇i3 ψH ||L∞  ∞
                                                                    u L (S)
                                                                            )(             ||∇i4 ψH ||L1u L2 (S) )
     i1 ≤1,i2 ≤3                                i3 ≤1                              i4 ≤3
              X                                       X                               X
  + C(                   ||∇   i1
                                    ψ||iL2∞  ∞
                                          u L (S)
                                                  )(      ||∇i3 ψH ||L∞  2
                                                                      u L (S)
                                                                              )(      ||∇i4 ψH ||L1u L∞ (S) )
           i1 ≤1,i2 ≤3                              i3 ≤3                       i4 ≤1

 + C||∇2 ψ||L∞  2
             u L (S)
                     ||ψH ||L∞   ∞
                             u L (S)
                                     ||ψH ||L1u L∞ (S)
    X                            X                         X
≤C(       ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  ∞
                      u L (S)
                              )(   ||∇  i3
                                           ψ  ||  ∞  ∞
                                             H Lu L (S) )(   ||f (u)∇i4 ψH ||L2u L2 (S) )||f (u)−1 ||L2u
     i1 ≤1,i2 ≤3                                i3 ≤1                              i4 ≤3
              X                                       X                               X
  + C(                   ||∇   i1
                                    ψ||iL2∞  ∞
                                          u L (S)
                                                  )(      ||∇i3 ψH ||L∞  2
                                                                      u L (S)
                                                                              )(      ||f (u)∇i4 ψH ||L2u L∞ (S) )||f (u)−1 ||L2u
           i1 ≤1,i2 ≤3                              i3 ≤3                       i4 ≤1

 + C||∇2 ψ||L∞    2
               u L (S)
                       ||ψH ||L∞  ∞
                               u L (S)
                                       ||f (u)ψH ||L2u L∞ (S) ||f (u)−1 ||L2u
                X                                 X
≤C(1 + ∆1 )3 (     ||f (u)∇i1 ψH ||L2u L2 (S) )(   ||∇i2 ψH ||L∞     2
                                                                   u L (S)
                                                                           )
                         i1 ≤3                                   i2 ≤3
                  X
≤C∆1 (1 + ∆1 )3 (  ||∇i ψH ||L∞  2
                               u L (S)
                                       ).
                             i≤3
                                                                                                                            (46)

Therefore, by the bounds (43), (44), (45) and (46), we have that for every fixed u,
                                                            1
   X                          X
       ||∇i ψH ||L∞
                  u L2 (S) ≤C(  ||∇i ψH ||L2 (Su,0 ) ) + C 2 f (u)−1 (R + Õ4,2 ) + C(1 + ∆1 )5
     i≤3                                       i≤3
                                                                         X
                                            + C∆1 (1 + ∆1 )3 (                ||∇i ψH ||L∞  2
                                                                                          u L (S)
                                                                                                  ).
                                                                         i≤3

We now multiply this inequality by f (u) and take the L2 norm in u to get
                X
                    ||f (u)∇i ψH ||L2u L∞  2
                                        u L (S)
                             i≤3
                                                  1
                          ≤C(Oini ) + C 2 ||f (u)(f (u)−1 )||L2u (R + Õ4,2 ) + C(1 + ∆1 )5
                                                 X
                           + C∆1 (1 + ∆1 )3 (       ||f (u)∇i ψH ||L2u L∞  2
                                                                         u L (S)
                                                                                 )
                                                           i≤3

                          ≤C(Oini ),

for  sufficiently small.                                                                                                      

  Using instead the equation for ∇3 ψH , we obtain the following estimates in a completely
analogous manner:

Proposition 14. Assume
                                                          R < ∞,          Õ4,2 < ∞.
38                                             JONATHAN LUK

Then there exists 0 = 0 (∆1 , R, Õ4,2 ) such that whenever  ≤ 0 ,
                                     X
                                           Oi,2 [ψH ] ≤ C(Oini ).
                                         i≤3

In particular, this estimate is independent of ∆1 .
  By the Sobolev embedding theorems given by Proposition 7, we have thus closed our
bootstrap assumption (A1) after choosing ∆1 to be sufficiently large depending on the initial
data norm Oini . We have therefore proved the desired estimates for the Ricci coefficients
and their first three angular covariant derivatives. We summarize this in the following
proposition.
Proposition 15. Assume
                                          R < ∞,          Õ4,2 < ∞.
Then there exists 0 = 0 (Oini , R, Õ4,2 ) such that whenever  ≤ 0 ,
                                  X
                                      Oi,2 [ψ, ψH , ψH ] ≤ C(Oini ).
                                   i≤3

     7. Elliptic Estimates for Fourth Derivatives of the Ricci Coefficients
  We now estimate the 4th derivative of the Ricci coefficients. We introduce the following
bootstrap assumption:
                                           Õ4,2 ≤ ∆2 ,                                    (A2)
where ∆2 is a constant to be chosen later.
  The estimates for the 4th derivative of the Ricci coefficients cannot be achieved only by
the transport equations since there would be a loss in derivatives. We can however use the
transport equation - Hodge system type estimates as in [15, 5, 16]. We will first derive
estimates for some chosen combination of ∇4 (ψ, ψH , ψH ) + ∇3 (β, K, σ̌, β) by using transport
equations. We will then show that the estimates for all the 4th derivatives of the Ricci
coefficients can be proved via elliptic estimates.
  In order to apply the elliptic estimates in Section 5.5, we need to first control the Gauss
curvature and its first and second derivatives in L2 (S).
Proposition 16. Assume
                                            R < ∞.
Then there exists 0 = 0 (∆2 , R) such that whenever  ≤ 0 ,
                                X
                                   ||∇i K||L∞  ∞ 2
                                            u Lu L (S)
                                                       ≤ C(Oini ).
                                  i≤2

Proof. K obeys the following Bianchi equation:
                                                            X
                        ∇4 K = ∇β + ψH K +                              ψ i1 ∇i2 ψ∇i3 ψH .
                                                        i1 +i2 +i3 ≤1

Commuting with angular derivatives, we have, for i ≤ 2,
 ∇4 ∇i K
    X                                X                                                X
=        ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 +1 β +                       ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 K +                          ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 ψH .
     i1 +i2 +i3 ≤2             i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤2                                i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤3
                             WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                                       39

                                                         ∞ 2
By Proposition 5, in order to control ∇i K in L∞      u Lu L (S), we need to bound the right hand
side in L∞   1 2
         u Lu L (S). We first control the term containing β:
                 X
            ||         ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 +1 β||L∞  1 2
                                           u Lu L (S)
                i1 +i2 +i3 ≤2
                        X                                                               X
           ≤C(                     ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  ∞ ∞
                                               u Lu L (S)
                                                          )||f (u)−1 ||L2u (                    ||f (u)∇i2 +1 β||L∞  2 2
                                                                                                                  u Lu L (S)
                                                                                                                             )
                     i1 ≤1,i2 ≤2                                                        i3 ≤2

           ≤C(Oini )R,
where we have used the estimates for ψ given by Proposition 15. The term containing K
can be controlled by
                  X
            ||          ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 K||L∞  1 2
                                                u Lu L (S)
                 i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤2
                        X                                         Z u         X
           ≤C(                     ||∇  i1
                                             ψ||iL2∞  ∞ ∞
                                                   u Lu L (S)
                                                              )         (               ||∇i3 ψH ∇i4 K||L∞  2
                                                                                                         u L (Su,u0 )
                                                                                                                      )du0
                     i1 ≤1,i2 ≤2                                   0        i3 +i4 ≤2
                             Z u        X
           ≤C(Oini )                (            ||∇i1 ψH ∇i2 K||L∞  2
                                                                  u L (Su,u0 )
                                                                               )du0
                               0     i1 +i2 ≤2
                     Z u X                               X
           ≤C(Oini )    (  ||∇i1 ψH ||L∞
                                       u L2 (S
                                              u,u 0 ) )(   ||∇i2 K||L∞  2
                                                                     u L (Su,u0 )
                                                                                  )du0 .
                               0     i1 ≤2                                      i2 ≤2

The remaining term has been bounded in the previous section. By (42) and Proposition 15,
                        X
                    ||        ψ i1 ∇i2 ψ∇i3 ψH ||L∞  1 2
                                                  u Lu L (S)
                                                             ≤ C(Oini ).
                                    i1 +i2 +i3 ≤2

Therefore, by Proposition 5,
       X
            ||∇i K||L∞  2
                     u L (Su,u )
         i≤2
                             Z u X                              X
      ≤C(Oini )(1 +  + R +    (  ||∇i1 ψH ||L∞
                                               u L2 (S
                                                      u,u0 ) )(   ||∇i2 K||L∞  2
                                                                            u L (Su,u0 )
                                                                                         )du0 ).
                                                 0    i1 ≤2                                      i2 ≤2

Gronwall’s inequality implies
           X                                         X
               ||∇i K||L∞
                        u L2 (S
                               u,u ) ≤ C(O ini ) exp(  ||∇i ψH ||L1u L∞  2
                                                                      u L (S)
                                                                              ) ≤ C(Oini )
               i≤2                                                           i≤2
                                        X
since by Proposition 15,                      ||∇i ψH ||L1u L∞  2
                                                             u L (S)
                                                                     ≤ C(Oini ) for  sufficiently small.                        
                                        i≤1

  It is easy to see that since σ̌ satisfies a similar schematic Bianchi equation as K, we also
have the following estimates for σ̌ and its derivative:
Proposition 17. Assume
                                              R < ∞.
Then there exists 0 = 0 (∆2 , R) such that whenever  ≤ 0 ,
                                X
                                    ||∇i σ̌||L∞  ∞ 2
                                              u Lu L (S)
                                                         ≤ C(Oini ).
                                                i≤2
40                                                          JONATHAN LUK

   Using Proposition 16, we now control the fourth derivatives of the Ricci coefficients. We
first bound ∇4 trχ using the transport equation.
Proposition 18. There exists 0 = 0 (Oini , ∆2 ) such that whenever  ≤ 0 ,
                                            ||f (u)∇4 trχ||L2u L∞  2
                                                                u L (S)
                                                                        ≤ C(Oini ).
Proof. Consider the following equation:
                                                        ∇4 trχ = ψH ψH ,
After commuting with angular derivatives, we have
                                      X
                      ∇4 ∇4 trχ =             ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψH .
                                                     i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =4

By Proposition 5, in order to control ∇4 trχ in L2 (Su,u ) , we need to bound the right hand
side in L1u L2 (S). Using the fact that f (u) is decreasing, this can be achieved using Sobolev
embedding (Proposition 7) by
         X         Z u
                       ||∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψH ||L2 (Su,u0 ) du0
       i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤4   0
                     XX                                     X                                   X
     ≤Cf (u)−2 (                   ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  2
                                               u L (S)
                                                       )(       ||f (u)∇i3 ψH ||L2u L2 (S) )(       ||f (u)∇i4 ψH ||L2u L2 (S) )
                     i1 ≤3 i2 ≤4                        i3 ≤2                               i4 ≤4
                −2
     ≤Cf (u) ∆2 .
By Proposition 5, we have
                                   ||∇4 trχ||L2 (Su,u ) ≤ C(Oini ) + C(Oini )f (u)−2 ∆2 .                                     (47)
Multiplying (47) by f (u) and taking first the L∞ norm in u and then the L2 norm in u, we
have
          ||f (u)∇4 trχ||L2u L∞  2
                              u L (S)
                                      ≤C(Oini ) + C(Oini )||f (u)−1 ||L2u ∆2 ≤ C(Oini ) + C∆2 ,

where we have used
                                                       ||f (u)−1 ||L2u ≤ C.
Thus, the conclusion follows by choosing  to be sufficiently small depending on ∆2 .                                              

     Once we have the estimates for ∇4 trχ, we can control ∇4 χ̂ using elliptic estimates:
Proposition 19. Assume
                                                                R < ∞.
Then there exists 0 = 0 (Oini , ∆2 , R) such that whenever  ≤ 0 ,
                                         ||f (u)∇4 χ̂||L∞  2 2
                                                        u Lu L (S)
                                                                   ≤ C(Oini ) + CR.
Proof. We now use the Codazzi equation
                                                         1
                                                 div χ̂ = ∇trχ − β + ψψH
                                                         2
                        WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                                       41

and apply elliptic estimates from Proposition 11 to get
    ||∇4 χ̂||L2 (S)
       X                       X                  X                          X
   ≤C(      ||∇i trχ||L2 (S) +   ||∇i β||L2 (S) +   ||∇i1 ψ∇i2 ψH ||L2 (S) +   ||∇i χ̂||L2 (S) ).
        i≤4                        i≤3                         i1 +i2 ≤3                              i≤3
                                                                                                                         (48)
Notice that we can apply elliptic estimates using Proposition 11 since we have the estimates
for the Gauss curvature from Proposition 16. Multiply (48) by f (u) and take the L∞         2
                                                                                         u Lu
norm to get
                              X                               X
 ||f (u)∇4 χ̂||L∞  2  2
                u Lu L (S)
                           ≤C(  ||f (u)∇ i
                                           trχ|| ∞  2  2
                                                Lu Lu L (S) +   ||f (u)∇i β||L∞  2 2
                                                                              u Lu L (S)
                                  i≤4                                          i≤3
                                         X                                                  X
                                                          i1        i2
                                  +               ||f (u)∇ ψ∇ ψH ||L∞  2 2
                                                                    u Lu L (S)
                                                                               +                   ||f (u)∇i χ̂||L∞  2 2
                                                                                                                  u Lu L (S)
                                                                                                                             )
                                      i1 +i2 ≤3                                              i≤3
                                                               X
                             ≤C(Oini ) + CR + C                          ||f (u)∇i1 ψ∇i2 ψH ||L∞  2 2
                                                                                               u Lu L (S)
                                                                                                          .
                                                          i1 +i2 ≤3

By Proposition 15 and Sobolev embedding theorem in Proposition 7, we have
               X
                    ||f (u)∇i1 ψ∇i2 ψH ||L∞  2 2
                                          u Lu L (S)
                i1 +i2 ≤3
                    X                                 X
              ≤C(           ||∇i1 ψ||L∞  ∞ 2
                                      u Lu L (S)
                                                 )(           ||f (u)∇i2 ψH ||L∞  2 2
                                                                               u Lu L (S)
                                                                                          ) ≤ C(Oini ).
                    i1 ≤3                             i2 ≤3

Therefore,
                                  ||f (u)∇4 χ̂||L∞  2 2
                                                 u Lu L (S)
                                                            ≤ C(Oini ) + CR.
                                                                                                                            
  The Õ4,2 estimates for ∇4 trχ and ∇4 χ̂ follow identically as that for ∇4 trχ and ∇4 χ̂:
Proposition 20. Assume
                                             R < ∞.
Then there exists 0 = 0 (Oini , ∆2 , R) such that whenever  ≤ 0 ,
                                      ||f (u)∇4 trχ||L∞  2 2
                                                      u Lu L (S)
                                                                 ≤ C(Oini ),
and
                                  ||f (u)∇4 χ̂||L∞  2 2
                                                 u Lu L (S)
                                                            ≤ C(Oini ) + CR.
   We then prove estimates for ∇4 η. To do so, we first prove estimates for third derivatives
of µ = −div η + K and recover the control for ∇4 η via elliptic estimates.
Proposition 21. Assume
                                             R < ∞.
Then there exists 0 = 0 (Oini , ∆2 , R) such that whenever  ≤ 0 ,
                                                                                     1
                                 ||f (u)∇4 η||L∞  2 2
                                               u Lu L (S)
                                                          ≤ C(Oini )( 2 + R),
and
                                                                                     1
                                 ||f (u)∇4 η||L∞  2 2
                                               u Lu L (S)
                                                          ≤ C(Oini )( 2 + R).
42                                                               JONATHAN LUK

Proof. Recall that
                                      µ = −div η + K.
Then µ satisfies the following equation26:
                                             X
                         ∇4 µ = ψH (K, σ̌) +       ψ i1 ∇i2 ψ∇i3 ψH .
                                                                        i1 +i2 +i3 =1

     After commuting with angular derivatives, we get
                     X                                                                          X
         ∇4 ∇3 µ =           ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 (K, σ̌) +                                                  ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 ψH .
                              i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =3                                         i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =4

We now control each of the terms on the right hand side in L1u L2 (S). The first term, which
contains curvature components, can be estimated by
                  X      Z u
                             ||∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 (K, σ̌)||L2 (Su,u0 ) du0
                         i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =3     0
                                                   XX                                     X
                    ≤Cf (u)−1 f (u)−1 (                          ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  2
                                                                             u L (S)
                                                                                     )(         ||f (u)∇i3 ψH ||L2u L2 (S) )
                                                   i1 ≤3 i2 ≤3                          i3 ≤3
                                      X
                                                         i4
                                 ×(           ||f (u)∇ (K, σ̌)||L2u L2 (S) )
                                      i4 ≤3

                    ≤C(Oini )f (u)−1 f (u)−1 R,
using the bounds obtained in Proposition 15. The second term can be controlled using
Sobolev embedding in Proposition 7 by
      X      Z u
                 ||∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 ψH ||L2 (Su,u0 ) du0
     i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =4    0
                                XX                                     X                                      X
≤Cf (u)−1 f (u)−1 (                           ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  2
                                                          u L (S)
                                                                  )(          ||f (u)∇i3 ψH ||L2u L2 (S) )(           ||f (u)∇i4 ψ||L2u L2 (S) )
                                i1 ≤4 i2 ≤5                           i3 ≤4                                   i4 ≤4
                         −1         −1               2
≤C(Oini )f (u) f (u) (1 + ∆2 )
using the estimates in Proposition 15. Therefore, by Proposition 5, we have
                              ||∇3 µ||L2 (Su,u ) ≤C(Oini )(1 + f (u)−1 f (u)−1 (R + (1 + ∆2 )2 )).                                        (49)
Recall that the L2u norm of f (u)−1 is bounded by . Thus, multiplying (49) by f (u) and
taking the L2 norm in u, we get
                                                                        1                                                    1
                    ||f (u)∇3 µ||L2u L2 (S) ≤ C(Oini )( 2 + (R + (1 + ∆2 )2 )) ≤ C(Oini ) 2 ,
for  sufficiently small. Similarly, multiplying (49) by f (u) and taking the L2 norm in u, we
get
                                                                    1
                                ||f (u)∇3 µ||L2u L2 (S) ≤ C(Oini ) 2 .
We can obtain bounds for ∇4 η from the control of ∇3 µ using elliptic estimates as follows.
By the div-curl systems
                                 div η = −µ + K, curl η = σ̌,
     26It is important to note that the potentially harmful term ψ
                                                                   H ψH ψH is absent in this equation. This
required structure is the reason that we perform this renormalization instead of using µ = −div η − ρ + 12 χ̂ · χ̂
as in [19, 18].
                       WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                    43

and the elliptic estimates given by Propositions 10 and 16, we have
                            X                   X                        X
         ||∇4 η||L2 (S) ≤ C(   ||∇i µ||L2 (S) +   ||∇i (K, σ̌)||L2 (S) +   ||∇i η||L2 (S) ).
                              i≤3                  i≤3                        i≤3

Therefore,
       ||f (u)∇4 η||L2u L2 (S)
           X                            X                                 X
      ≤C(     ||f (u)∇i µ||L2u L2 (S) +   ||f (u)∇i (K, σ̌)||L2u L2 (S) +   ||f (u)∇i η||L2u L2 (S) )
             i≤3                        i≤3                                i≤3
                   1
      ≤C(Oini )( + R).
                   2



Similarly,
                                                                   1
                              ||f (u)∇4 η||L2u L2 (S) ≤ C(Oini )( 2 + R).
                                                                                                        

  A similar proof shows that the conclusion of Proposition 21 holds also for ∇3 η:
Proposition 22. Assume
                                                R < ∞.
Then there exists 0 = 0 (Oini , ∆2 , R) such that whenever  ≤ 0 ,
                                                                       1
                             ||f (u)∇4 η||L∞  2 2
                                           u Lu L (S)
                                                      ≤ C(Oini )( 2 + R),

and
                                                                       1
                             ||f (u)∇4 η||L∞  2 2
                                           u Lu L (S)
                                                      ≤ C(Oini )( 2 + R).

  We now move to the estimates for ∇4 ω:
Proposition 23. Assume
                                                R < ∞.
Then there exists 0 = 0 (Oini , ∆2 , R) such that whenever  ≤ 0 ,
                             ||f (u)∇4 ω||L∞  2 2
                                           u Lu L (S)
                                                      ≤ C(Oini )(1 + R).

Proof. Let ω † be defined as the solution to
                                                      1
                                              ∇4 ω † = σ̌
                                                      2
with zero data on H 0 and
                                                              1
                                    κ := −∇ω +∗ ∇ω † − β.
                                                              2
                      †
By the definition of ω , it is easy to see that using Proposition 5,
                           X
                                ||∇i ω † ||L2u L∞  2
                                                u L (S)
                                                        ≤ CR ≤ C(Oini ).
                              i≤3
44                                                          JONATHAN LUK

In other words, ∇i ω † satisfies much better estimates27 than ∇i ψH for i ≤ 3. With this in
mind, in the proof of this proposition, we will also use ψH to denote ω † (in addition to trχ,
χ̂ and ω).
   With this convention, κ then obeys the following schematic equation:
                                  X                       X
           ∇4 κ = ψ(K, σ̌) +           ψ i1 ∇i2 ψ∇i3 ψ +        ψ i1 ∇i2 ψH ∇i3 ψH .
                                          i1 +i2 +i3 =1                                i1 +i2 +i3 =1

After commuting with angular derivatives, we get
                     X                                                                       X
        ∇4 ∇3 κ =           ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 (K, σ̌) +                                                    ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 ψ
                        i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =3                                              i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =4
                                    X
                        +                         ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψH .
                              i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =4

Therefore,
                                                                           X
          ||∇3 κ||L2 (Su,u ) ≤C||∇3 κ||L2 (Su,0 ) + C||                                  ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 (K, σ̌)||L1u L2 (S)
                                                                     i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =3
                                                  X
                                                                   i1
                                 + C||                        ∇ ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 ψ||L1u L2 (S)
                                         i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =4
                                                  X
                                 + C||                        ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψH ||L1u L2 (S) .
                                         i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =4

Multiplying by f (u) and taking the L2 norm in u, we get
            ||f (u)∇3 κ||L2u L2 (S)
                                                                        X
          ≤C||f (u)∇3 κ||L2u L2 (Su,0 ) + C||f (u)                                    ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 (K, σ̌)||L2u L1u L2 (S)
                                                                  i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =3
                                  X
                                                  i1   i2    i3
             + C||f (u)                       ∇ ψ ∇ ψ∇i4 ψ||L2u L1u L2 (S)
                          i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =4
                                  X
             + C||f (u)                       ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψH ||L2u L1u L2 (S) .
                          i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =4

The first term is an initial data term and it is bounded by a constant depending only on
Oini . We estimate each of the nonlinear terms. The second term can be controlled by
                           X
                ||f (u)            ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 (K, σ̌)||L2u L1u L2 (S)
                               i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =3
                          XX                                             X
                   ≤C(                 ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  ∞ 2
                                                    u Lu L (S)
                                                               )(                ||f (u)∇i3 (K, σ̌)||L∞  2 2
                                                                                                      u Lu L (S)
                                                                                                                 )
                          i1 ≤3 i2 ≤4                                    i3 ≤3

                   ≤C(Oini )R.

     27We recall that for ψ
                              H we only have the degenerate estimate
                                          X
                                                ||f (u)∇i ψH ||L2u L∞  2
                                                                    u L (S)
                                                                            ≤ C(Oini ).
                                          i≤3
                             WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                                       45

The third term can be bounded by
                X
      ||f (u)          ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 ψ||L2u L1u L2 (S)
                 i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =4
             XX                                        X                                 X
      ≤C(                 ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  ∞ 2
                                       u Lu L (S)
                                                  )(           ||∇i3 ψ||L∞  ∞ 2
                                                                         u Lu L (S)
                                                                                    )(           ||f (u)∇i4 ψ||L∞  2 2
                                                                                                                u Lu L (S)
                                                                                                                           )
             i1 ≤3 i2 ≤4                               i3 ≤3                         i4 ≤4

      ≤C(Oini )∆2 .
The fourth term can be estimated by
              X
     ||f (u)         ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψH ||L2u L1u L2 (S)
              i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =4
         1
             XX                                        X                                 X
   ≤C ( 2                 ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  ∞ 2
                                       u Lu L (S)
                                                  )(       ||∇i3 ψH ||L1u L∞  2
                                                                           u L (S)
                                                                                   )(            ||f (u)∇i4 ψH ||L∞  2 2
                                                                                                                  u Lu L (S)
                                                                                                                             )
             i1 ≤3 i2 ≤4                           i3 ≤3                                 i4 ≤4
                     −1                  4
      + C||f (u) ||L2u ||f (u)∇ ψH ||L∞  2 2
                                      u Lu L (S)
                                                 ||f (u)ψH ||L2u L∞  ∞
                                                                  u L (S)

   ≤C(Oini )(1 + ∆2 ).
Therefore,
                    ||f (u)∇3 κ||L2u L∞  2
                                      u L (S)
                                              ≤C(Oini )(1 + (1 + ∆2 + R)) ≤ C(Oini ),                                         (50)
after choosing  to be sufficiently small. Finally, we retrieve the estimates for ∇4 ω and ∇4 ω †
from the bounds for ∇3 κ. To this end, consider the div-curl system
                                                              1
                                      div ∇ω = −div κ − div β,
                                                              2
                                                curl ∇ω = 0,
                                                              1
                                     div ∇ω † = −curl κ − curl β,
                                                              2
                                                         †
                                                curl ∇ω = 0.
By elliptic estimates given by Propositions 10 and 16, we have
                                  X                      X                      X
   ||∇4 (ω, ω † )||L2 (Su,u ) ≤C(   ||∇i κ||L2 (Su,u ) +   ||∇i β||L2 (Su,u ) +   ||∇i (ω, ω † )||L2 (Su,u ) ).
                                      i≤3                           i≤3                            i≤3

Therefore, using Proposition 12, (50) and the curvature norm,
                                  ||f (u)∇4 (ω, ω † )||L∞  2 2
                                                        u Lu L (S)
                                                                   ≤ C(Oini )(1 + R).
                                                                                                                                 
  By switching ω and ω as well as e3 and e4 , we also have the following estimates for ∇4 ω:
Proposition 24. Assume
                                             R < ∞.
Then there exists 0 = 0 (Oini , ∆2 , R) such that whenever  ≤ 0 ,
                                     ||f (u)∇4 ω||L∞  2 2
                                                   u Lu L (S)
                                                              ≤ C(Oini )(1 + R).
   We have thus controlled the fourth angular derivatives of all Ricci coefficients and have
closed the bootstrap assumption (A2) after choosing ∆2 to be sufficiently large depending
on Oini and R. We summarize this in the following proposition:
46                                                              JONATHAN LUK

Proposition 25. Assume

                                                                    R < ∞.

There exists 0 = 0 (Oini , R) such that whenever  ≤ 0 ,


                                                       Õ4,2 ≤ C(Oini )(1 + R).




                                               8. Estimates for Curvature
   In this section, we derive and prove the energy estimates. To this end, we introduce the
following bootstrap assumptions:

                                                                    R ≤ ∆3 ,                                                                 (A3)

where ∆3 is a constant to be chosen later.
  In order to derive the energy estimates, we need the following integration by parts formula,
which can be proved by direct computations:

Proposition 26. Let Du,u be defined as the spacetime region whose coordinates (u0 , u0 ) satisfy
0 ≤ u0 ≤ u and 0 ≤ u0 ≤ u. Suppose φ1 and φ2 are tensors of rank r, then

         Z                       Z                         Z                        Z                         Z
                    φ1 ∇4 φ2 +              φ2 ∇4 φ1 =                    φ1 φ2 −                  φ1 φ2 +               (2ω − trχ)φ1 φ2 ,
         Du,u                    Du,u                      H u (0,u)                  H 0 (0,u)                   Du,u




         Z                       Z                         Z                        Z                         Z
                    φ1 ∇3 φ2 +              φ2 ∇3 φ1 =                    φ1 φ2 −                 φ1 φ2 +                (2ω − trχ)φ1 φ2 .
             Du,u                    Du,u                      Hu (0,u)               H0 (0,u)                Du,u


Proposition 27. Suppose we have a tensor (1) φ of rank r and a tensor (2) φ of rank r − 1.
Then
Z                                                      Z                                                                 Z
         (1) A1 A2 ...Ar                                             Ar (1)                  (2) A1 ...Ar−1
              φ            ∇Ar   (2)
                                       φA1 ...Ar−1 +              ∇           φA1 A2 ...Ar     φ              =−                 (η + η)(1) φ(2) φ.
 Du,u                                                    Du,u                                                             Du,u


  With these we are now ready to derive energy estimates for ∇i (K, σ̌) in L2 (Hu ) and for
∇ β in L2 (H u ). The most important observation is that the two uncontrollable terms have
     i

favorable signs. This in turn is due to the choice of f (u) which is decreasing towards the
future.
                       WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                                  47

Proposition 28. The following L2 estimates for the curvature hold:
            X
             (||f (u)∇i (K, σ̌)||2L∞  2 2
                                   u Lu L (S)
                                              + ||f (u)∇i β||2L∞  2 2
                                                               u Lu L (S)
                                                                          )
            i≤3
           X
         ≤  (||f (u)∇i (K, σ̌)||2L2u L2 (S0,u ) + ||f (u)∇i β||2L2u L2 (Su,0 ) )
            i≤3
                        X                             X
            + ||f (u)2 (  ∇i (K, σ̌))(                              ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 ψH )||L1u L1u L1 (S)
                            i≤3                 i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤4
                       X                              X
            + ||f (u) ( 2
                         ∇i (K, σ̌))(                               ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 (K, σ̌))||L1u L1u L1 (S)
                            i≤3                 i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤3
                        X                      X
            + ||f (u)2 (  ∇i β)(                             ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 (K, σ̌))||L1u L1u L1 (S)
                            i≤3          i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤3
                        X                      X
            + ||f (u)2 (  ∇i β)(                             ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 K∇i4 (K, σ̌))||L1u L1u L1 (S)
                            i≤3          i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤2
                       X                       X
            + ||f (u) ( 2
                         ∇i β)(                              ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψH )||L1u L1u L1 (S) .
                            i≤3          i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤4


Proof. Consider the following schematic Bianchi equations:
                                                                    X
                            ∇3 σ̌ + div ∗ β =ψH σ̌ +                           ψ i1 ∇i2 ψ∇i3 ψH ,
                                                               i1 +i2 +i3 =1
                                                                    X
                            ∇3 K − div β =ψH K +                                ψ i1 ∇i2 ψ∇i3 ψH ,
                                                                i1 +i2 +i3 =1
                                                                        X
                                     ∗
                   ∇4 β − ∇K − ∇σ̌ =ψ(K, σ̌) +                                      ψ i1 ∇i2 ψH ∇i3 ψH .
                                                                    i1 +i2 +i3 =1


Commute the first equation with i angular derivatives for i ≤ 3, we get the equation for
∇3 ∇i σ̌,

           ∇3 ∇i σ̌ + div ∗ ∇i β
                                                                                                                    (51)
               X                                                               X
          =             ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 (K, σ̌) +                                      ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 ψH .
            i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =i                                        i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =i+1


Notice that in the above equation, there are terms arising from the commutator [∇i , div ]β,
which can be expressed in terms of the Gauss curvature. After substituting also the Co-
dazzi equations for β, we get that these terms have the form of the first term in the above
expression. The equation for ∇3 ∇i K has a similar structure:

           ∇3 ∇i K − div ∇i β
                                                                                                                    (52)
               X                                                               X
          =           ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 (K, σ̌) +                                        ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 ψH .
            i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =i                                        i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =i+1
48                                                        JONATHAN LUK

Finally, we have the following structure for ∇4 ∇i β:

                   ∇4 ∇i β − ∇∇i K −∗ ∇∇i σ̌
                       X                                                       X
                  =           ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 (K, σ̌) +                                 ψ i1 ∇i2 K∇i3 (K, σ̌)
                      i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =i                                 i1 +i2 +i3 =i−1                                   (53)
                                 X
                      +                         ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψH .
                          i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =i+1


As a shorthand, we denote by Fi,1 the terms of the form

                            X                                                     X
          Fi,1 :=                         ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 (K, σ̌) +                          ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 ψH ,
                      i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =i                                    i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =i+1


and by Fi,2 the terms of the form

                                X                                                X
              Fi,2 :=                         ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 (K, σ̌) +                     ψ i1 ∇i2 K∇i3 (K, σ̌)
                          i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =i                                 i1 +i2 +i3 =i−1
                                     X
                          +                         ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψH .
                              i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =i+1


Contracting (53) with ∇i β, integrating in the region Du,u , applying Proposition 27 and using
equations (51) and (52) yield the following identity on the derivatives of the curvature:
          Z
                   f (u)2 h∇i β, ∇4 ∇i βiγ
           D
          Z u,u
      =            f (u)2 hβ, ∇∇i K +∗ ∇∇i σiγ + f (u)2 h∇i β, Fi,2 iγ
           D
          Z u,u
      =            −f (u)2 hdiv ∇i β, ∇i Kiγ + f (u)2 hdiv ∗ ∇i β, ∇i σ̌iγ + f (u)2 h∇i β, Fi,2 iγ                        (54)
           Du,u
          Z
      =            −f (u)2 h∇3 ∇i K, ∇i Kiγ − f (u)2 h∇3 ∇i σ̌, ∇i σ̌iγ
           Du,u
              Z
          +             f (u)2 h∇i β, Fi,2 iγ + f (u)2 h∇i (K, σ̌), Fi,1 iγ .
               Du,u


Using Proposition 26, since ∇4 f (u) = 0, we have
                  Z
                  f (u)2 h∇i β, ∇4 ∇i βiγ
               1
                 Z                     Z                   Z
                                                                            1                                             (55)
                           2    i 2             2  i 2
              = (     f (u) |∇ β| −        f (u) |∇ β| ) +       f (u)2 (ω − trχ)|∇i β|2 .
               2 Hu                     H0                  Du,u            2
                              WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                    49

For the terms with ∇3 ∇i K and ∇3 ∇i σ̌, we similarly apply Proposition 26, but noting that
there is an extra contribution coming from ∇3 f (u):
             Z
                   f (u)2 h∇i K, ∇3 ∇i Kiγ
              Du,u
                Z                                Z                 Z
                                            1             2  i  2
           =−                         i  2
                       f (u)∇3 f (u)|∇ K| + (        f (u) |∇ K| −     f (u)2 |∇i K|2 ) (56)
                  Du,u                      2     Hu                H0
                Z
                                   1
             +         f (u)2 (ω − trχ)|∇i K|2 .
                 Du,u              2
Similarly,
                    Z
                             f (u)2 h∇i σ̌, ∇3 ∇i σ̌iγ
                      Du,u
                         Z                         Z                Z
                                              1      i    22 i 2
               =−       f (u)∇3 f (u)|∇ σ̌| + (      f (u) |∇ σ̌| −     f (u)2 |∇i σ̌|2 )                    (57)
                   D                          2 Hu                   H0
                  Z u,u
                                    1
                +       f (u)2 (ω − trχ)|∇i σ̌|2 .
                   Du,u             2
Combining (54)-(57), we thus have the identity
       Z                  Z                   Z
                2   i 2            2  i  2
           f (u) |∇ β| +      f (u) |∇ K| +                                  f (u)2 |∇i σ̌|2
             Hu                           Hu                            Hu
                  Z                                             Z
            −2           f (u)∇3 f (u)|∇i K|2 − 2       f (u)∇3 f (u)|∇i σ̌|2
                    Du,u                           Du,u
            Z                       Z                    Z
        =                2   i 2
                    f (u) |∇ β| +            2   i  2
                                        f (u) |∇ K| +         f (u)2 |∇i σ̌|2
             H u0                          Hu0                          Hu0
                  Z                                                 Z
                                 1                                   1
            −2      f (u)2 (ω − trχ)|∇i β|2 − 2        f (u)2 (ω − trχ)(|∇i K|2 + |∇i σ̌|2 )
                D                2                Du,u               2
              Z u,u                       Z
            +     f (u)2 h∇i β, Fi,2 iγ +   f (u)2 h∇i (K, σ̌), Fi,1 iγ .
                  Du,u                                   Du,u

The terms                         Z                                       Z
                                                                i   2
                             −2          f (u)∇3 f (u)|∇ K| − 2                      f (u)∇3 f (u)|∇i σ̌|2
                                  Du,u                                        Du,u
                                                                         28
on the left hand side, which cannot be controlled by the curvature flux (i.e., the integrals
of ∇i of the curvature components along Hu or H u ), have a favorable sign! This is because

  28In fact, if we do not drop this term, we can control the spacetime integral
                                                 Z
                                                         (−f (u)∇3 f (u))|∇i (K, σ̌)|2
                                                 Du,u

where the weight (−f (u)∇3 f (u)) can be singular. For weights such as f (u) = (u − u∗ )α for α < 12 or
                  1
f (u) = (u − u∗ ) 2 logβ ( u−u
                             1
                               ∗
                                 ) for β > 12 , this bound is “logarithmically” stronger than simply taking the
bound for Hu f (u) |∇ (K, σ̌)|2 and integrating in u.
                     2   i
          R
50                                                         JONATHAN LUK

the weight function f satisfies f (u)∇3 f (u) < 0. Therefore, we get an inequality for every i:
     Z                       Z                              Z
                 2   i   2                 2     i     2
             f (u) |∇ β| +            f (u) |∇ K| +                f (u)2 |∇i σ̌|2
      H                          Hu                           Hu
     Z u                        Z                            Z
≤            f (u)2 |∇i β|2 +          f (u)2 |∇i K|2 +               f (u)2 |∇i σ̌|2
      H u0                       Hu0                            Hu0
                     1                                                    1
     + C||f (u)2 (ω − trχ)∇i β∇i β||L1u L1u L1 (S) + C||f (u)2 (ω − trχ)∇i (K, σ̌)∇i (K, σ̌)||L1u L1u L1 (S)
                     2                                                    2
               2 i                                 2 i
     + C||f (u) ∇ βFi,2 ||L1u L1u L1 (S) + C||f (u) ∇ (K, σ̌)Fi,1 ||L1u L1u L1 (S) .

We now add the above inequalities for i ≤ 3. One can easily check that the terms

                                X                1
                                    ||f (u)2 (ω − trχ)∇i (K, σ̌)∇i (K, σ̌)||L1u L1u L1 (S) ,
                                i≤3
                                                 2


                                               X
                                                      ||f (u)2 ∇i βFi,2 ||L1u L1u L1 (S)
                                               i≤3


and
                                           X
                                                 ||f (u)2 ∇i (K, σ̌)Fi,1 ||L1u L1u L1 (S)
                                           i≤3


have the form of one of the terms in the statement of the proposition. After applying the
Codazzi equation

                                                     β = ∇ψH + ψ(ψ + ψH )

to one of the β’s, we note that the term

                                       X                1
                                           ||f (u)2 (ω − trχ)∇i β∇i β||L1u L1u L1 (S)
                                       i≤3
                                                        2


is also one of the terms in the statement of the proposition.                                            


  To close the energy estimates, we also need to control ∇i β in L2 (H) and ∇i (K, σ̌) in
 2
L (H). It is not difficult to see, by virtue of the structure of the Einstein equations, that
Proposition 28 also holds when all the barred and unbarred quantities are exchanged. The
proof is exactly analogous to that of Proposition 28.
                           WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                                 51

Proposition 29. The following L2 estimates for the curvature components hold:
          X
             (||f (u)∇i (K, σ̌)||2L∞  2 2
                                   u Lu L (S)
                                              + ||f (u)∇i β||2L∞  2 2
                                                               u Lu L (S)
                                                                          )
               i≤3
              X
            ≤  (||f (u)∇i (K, σ̌)||2L2u L2 (Su,0 ) + ||f (u)∇i β||2L2u L2 (S0,u ) )
               i≤3
                           X                                X
               + ||f (u)2 (  ∇i (K, σ̌))(                                 ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 ψH )||L1u L1u L1 (S)
                                i≤3                   i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤4
                           X                                X
               + ||f (u)2 (  ∇i (K, σ̌))(                                 ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 (K, σ̌))||L1u L1u L1 (S)
                                i≤3                   i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤3
                          X                          X
               + ||f (u) ( 2
                            ∇i β)(                                 ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 (K, σ̌))||L1u L1u L1 (S)
                                i≤3            i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤3
                           X                         X
               + ||f (u)2 (  ∇i β)(                                ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 K∇i4 (K, σ̌))||L1u L1u L1 (S)
                                i≤3            i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤2
                           X                         X
               + ||f (u)2 (  ∇i β)(                                ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψH )||L1u L1u L1 (S) .
                                i≤3            i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤4

  We now show that we can control all the nonlinear error terms in the energy estimates.
We show this for K and σ̌ in L2 (Hu ) and β in L2 (H u ). The other case can be dealt with in
a similar fashion (see Proposition 31).
Proposition 30. There exists 0 = 0 (Oini , Rini , ∆3 ) sufficiently small such that whenever
 ≤ 0 ,
         X
            (||f (u)∇i (K, σ̌)||L∞  2 2
                                 u Lu L (S)
                                            + ||f (u)∇i β||L∞  2 2
                                                            u Lu L (S)
                                                                       ) ≤ C(Oini , Rini ).
              i≤3

Proof. To prove the curvature estimates, we use Proposition 28. By assumptions of Theorem
2 (see also Remark 11), the two terms corresponding to the initial data are bounded by a
constant C(Rini ) depending only on initial data. Therefore, we need to control the remaining
five error terms in Proposition 28. We first look at the term
                          X              X
               ||f (u)2 (   ∇i (K, σ̌))(         ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψ)||L1u L1u L1 (S) .
                                i≤3                  i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤4

Using Propositions 15 and 25, together with the bootstrap assumption (A3), we have
             X              X
   ||f (u)2 (  ∇i (K, σ̌))(         ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψ)||L1u L1u L1 (S)
              i≤3                     i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤4
    X                                   XX                           X
                                                     i2
 ≤C(  ||f (u)∇i (K, σ̌)||L∞  2  2
                          u Lu L (S)
                                     )(    ||∇ i1
                                                  ψ||L∞   ∞ 2
                                                       u Lu L (S)
                                                                  )(   ||f (u)∇i3 ψ||L∞  2 2
                                                                                      u Lu L (S)
                                                                                                 )
      i≤3                                             i1 ≤3 i2 ≤4                             i3 ≤4
            X
                               i4                              −1
      ×(            ||f (u)∇ ψH ||L2u L∞  2
                                       u L (S)
                                               )||f (u) ||L2u
            i4 ≤3
         X
    + C(  ||f (u)∇i (K, σ̌)||L∞  2 2
                               u Lu L (S)
                                          )||ψ||L∞  ∞ ∞
                                                 u Lu L (S)
                                                            ||f (u)∇4 ψH ||L∞  2 2
                                                                            u Lu L (S)
             i≤2

 ≤C(Oini )∆3 (1 + ∆3 ).
52                                                          JONATHAN LUK

The term
          X                                 X
||f (u)2 (  ∇i (K, σ̌))(                              ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 (K, σ̌))||L1u L1u L1 (S) ≤ C(Oini )∆3 (1 + ∆3 )
           i≤3                    i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤3

similarly as in the previous estimate since by Propositions 16 and 17, ∇i (K, σ̌) satisfies
exactly the same estimates as ∇i+1 ψ. We then consider the third nonlinear term
                         X          X
               ||f (u)2 (  ∇i β)(          ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 (K, σ̌))||L1u L1u L1 (S) .
                                  i≤3              i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤3

Using Propositions 15 and 25 and the bootstrap assumptions (A3), we have
              X         X
   ||f (u)2 (   ∇i β)(         ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψ∇i4 (K, σ̌))||L1u L1u L1 (S)
                 i≤3           i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤3
     X                                                  X                                             X
 ≤C(  ||f (u)∇i β||L∞  2 2
                     u Lu L (S)
                                )(                                  ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  ∞ 2
                                                                                u Lu L (S)
                                                                                           )||f (u)         ∇i (K, σ̌)||L∞  2 2
                                                                                                                         u Lu L (S)
          i≤3                                      i1 ≤3,1≤i2 ≤3                                      i≤3

 ≤C(Oini )∆3 (1 + ∆3 ).
The fourth nonlinear term can be estimated analogously as the third nonlinear term by
            X           X
  ||f (u)2 (  ∇i β)(           ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 K∇i4 (K, σ̌))||L1u L1u L1 (S) ≤ C(Oini )∆3 (1 + ∆3 ).
                 i≤3           i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤2

As before, this is because by Propositions 16 and 17, ∇i (K, σ̌) satisfies exactly the same
estimates as ∇i+1 ψ. Thus it remains to control
                          X         X
                ||f (u)2 (  ∇i β)(          ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψH )||L1u L1u L1 (S) .
                                      i≤3           i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤4

This term can be bounded as follows:
              X        X
    ||f (u)2 (  ∇i β)(          ∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψH )||L1u L1u L1 (S)
                  i≤3           i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤4
        X                             XX
     ≤C(  ||f (u)∇i β||L∞  2 2
                        u Lu L (S)
                                   )(    ||∇i1 ψ||iL2∞  ∞ 2
                                                     u Lu L (S)
                                                                )
          i≤3                                      i1 ≤3 i2 ≤3
                X                                           X
         ×(                      i3
                        ||f (u)∇ ψH ||L2u L∞  2
                                           u L (S)
                                                   )(               ||f (u)∇i4 ψH ||L∞  2 2
                                                                                     u Lu L (S)
                                                                                                )||f (u)−1 ||L2u
                i3 ≤3                                       i4 ≤4
           X
       + C(  ||f (u)∇i β||L∞  2 2
                           u Lu L (S)
                                      )||f (u)−1 ||L2u ||f (u)∇4 ψH ||L∞  2 ∞
                                                                       u Lu L (S)
                                                                                  ||f (u)ψH ||L2u L∞  ∞
                                                                                                   u L (S)
                i≤2

     ≤C(Oini )∆3 (1 + ∆3 ).
Therefore, gathering all the above estimates, we have
X
  (||f (u)∇i (K, σ̌)||2L∞  2 2
                        u Lu L (S)
                                   + ||f (u)∇i β||2L∞  2 2
                                                    u Lu L (S)
                                                               ) ≤ C(Oini , Rini ) + C(Oini )∆3 (1 + ∆3 ),
i≤3

which implies the conclusion of the proposition after taking  to be sufficiently small.                                          
   Notice that the schematic equations are symmetric under the change ∇3 ↔ ∇4 , u ↔ u
and ψH ↔ ψH . Since the conditions for the initial data are also symmetric, we also have the
following analogous energy estimates for ∇i β on Hu and ∇i (K, σ̌) on H u :
                        WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                    53

Proposition 31. There exists 0 = 0 (Oini , Rini , ∆3 ) sufficiently small such that whenever
 ≤ 0 ,
         X
            (||f (u)∇i β||L∞  2 2
                           u Lu L (S)
                                      + ||f (u)∇i (K, σ̌)||L∞  2 2
                                                            u Lu L (S)
                                                                       ) ≤ C(Oini , Rini ).
             i≤3

  Propositions 30 and 31 together imply
Proposition 32. There exists 0 = 0 (Oini , Rini ) such that whenever  ≤ 0 ,
                                             R ≤ C(Oini , Rini ).
Proof. Let
                                          ∆3  C(Oini , Rini ),
where C(Oini , Rini ) is taken to be the maximum of the upper bounds in Propositions 30 and
31. Hence, the choice of ∆3 depends only on Oini and Rini . Thus, by Propositions 30 and 31,
the bootstrap assumption (A3) can be improved by choosing  sufficiently small depending
on Oini and Rini .                                                                        

  Combining Propositions 15, 25 and 32, we conclude the proof of Theorem 5. As mentioned
previously, standard methods then imply Theorem 2.

                            9. Nature of the Singular Boundary
   As described by Theorems 3 and 4, we will also prove the regularity and singularity of the
boundary Hu∗ and H u∗ . We first prove the regularity of the boundary asserted in Theorem
3.

Proof of Theorem 3. The fact that (M, g) can be extended continuously up to and beyond
Hu∗ and H u∗ simply follows from the continuity of the metric components Ω, γ and b proved
in Propositions 1-4. To obtain the higher regularity for γ, we recall the equations (32), (36)
and (37):
                    ∂ −1               ∂                       ∂ A
                       Ω = 2ω,            γAB = 2ΩχAB ,           b = −4Ω2 ζ A .
                    ∂u                 ∂u                      ∂u
                                       ∂ i
Commuting these equations with ( ∂θ     ) and using the bounds29 for the Ricci coefficients
obtained in the proof of Theorem 5, we conclude that
                   X                       ∂   ∂
                          sup sup k( 1 )i1 ( 2 )i2 (γ, b, Ω)kL2 (Ui (u,u)) ≤ C.
                 i +i ≤4
                         0≤u≤u∗ 0≤u≤u∗   ∂θ   ∂θ
                    1   2


The boundedness of ψ and its angular derivatives
                               X
                                   k∇i ψkL∞  ∞ 2
                                          u Lu L (S)
                                                     ≤ C.
                                       i≤3


  29Notice that by controlling γ and its coordinate angular derivatives ( ∂ )i γ, we can show also that ∂
                                                                           ∂θ                            ∂θ
and ∇ are comparable up to lower order terms, which allows us to apply the estimates for ∇i trχ, ∇i χ̂, ∇i η
and ∇i η to bound the coordinate angular derivatives of the metric components.
54                                                  JONATHAN LUK

are already proved in Theorem 5. To control ψH and its angular derivatives on the singular
boundary H u∗ , we first note that by the smoothness assumption on the interior of the initial
hypersurface H 0 , we have that for every fixed U ∈ [0, u∗ ),
                                X
                                     sup k∇i ψH kL2 (Su,0 ) ≤ CU
                                                0≤u≤U
                                          i≤5


for some finite CU . We now revisit the proof of Proposition 13 to bound ∇i ψH up to i ≤ 3
for u ∈ [0, U ]. Restricting to [0, U ], f (u)−1 is bounded. Therefore, the estimates in (43),
(44) and (45) are bounded uniformly in u. Finally, (46) can be replaced by the estimate
                  Z u     X
                                  k∇i1 ψ i2 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψH ||L2 (Su,u0 ) du0
                      0   i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤3
                   Z u X                           X
                ≤C    (  ||∇i1 ψH ||L2 (Su,u0 ) )(   sup ||∇i2 ψH ||L2 (Su,u00 ) )du0 .
                          0                                       0≤u00 ≤u
                              i1 ≤3                       i2 ≤3

Putting these bounds together, we have
             X
                  sup k∇i ψH kL2 (Su,u0 )
                      0≤u≤U
                i≤3
                      0≤u0 ≤u
                    Z u X                           X
            ≤CU + C    (  ||∇i1 ψH ||L2 (Su,u0 ) )(   sup ||∇i2 ψH ||L2 (Su,u00 ) )du0 ,
                                                                         0
                              0   i1 ≤3                      i2 ≤3 0≤u00≤U0
                                                                   0≤u ≤u

which implies
                                          X
                                                 sup k∇i ψH kL2 (Su,u ) ≤ CU               (58)
                                              0≤u≤U
                                          i≤3 0≤u≤u
                                                   ∗


after applying Gronwall’s inequality.
   To conclude the proof, it remains to control ∇3 ∇i ψ and ∇3 ∇i ψH for i ≤ 2. Since η obeys
a ∇3 equation (see (9)), by directly controlling the right hand side of the null structure
equation (commuted with angular derivatives) and using the bounds in Theorem 5, we get
                               X
                                   sup k∇3 ∇i ηkL2 (Su,u ) ≤ CU .
                                              0≤u≤U
                                          i≤2 0≤u≤u
                                                    ∗


To control the term ∇3 ∇i η, notice that combining the ∇3 η equation in (9) and the equations
in (7), we have

     ∇3 η = −∇3 η + 2∇3 ∇(log Ω) = χ · (η − η) − β − ∇ω − 4ω∇(log Ω) − 2χ · ∇(log Ω).

Upon expressing β in terms of ψH using the Codazzi equation in (10), commuting the
equation with ∇i and using the bound (58), we get
                            X
                                 sup k∇3 ∇i ηkL2 (Su,u ) ≤ CU .               (59)
                                              0≤u≤U
                                          i≤2 0≤u≤u
                                                    ∗
                           WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                                    55

 Finally, we control the terms ∇3 ∇i ψH . Commuting the null structure equations for ∇4 ψH
in (8) and (9) with ∇3 ∇i , we have
                ∇4 ∇3 ∇i ψH
                    X             j1 j2 i2 i3 j3 i4      j1 j2 i2 i3 j3 i4
               =            (∇i1 ψH ∇3 ∇ ψ ∇3 ∇ K + ∇i1 ψH ∇3 ∇ ψ ∇3 ∇ ∇ψ)
                j1 +j2 +j3 +j4 =1
                 i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 =i
                           X                     j1 j2 i2 i3 j3 i4
                +                           ∇i1 ψH ∇3 ∇ ψ ∇3 ∇ ψ∇i5 ψ
                        j1 +j2 +j3 =1
                    i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 +i5 =i
                           X                     j1 j2 i2 i3 j3 i4
                +                           ∇i1 ψH ∇3 ∇ ψ ∇3 ∇ ψH ∇j34 ∇i5 ψH .
                      j1 +j2 +j3 +j4 =1
                    i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 +i5 =i

Estimating directly the right hand side of the null structure equations or the Bianchi equa-
tions, we can easily show that
                        X
                            sup k∇3 (∇i K, ∇i η, ∇i ψH )kL1u L2 (S) ≤ CU .
                                      0≤u≤U
                                i≤2

Using also (59), we thus have
X                                       Z u                        X
                i
     sup k∇3 ∇ ψH kL2 (Su,u ) ≤ CU + CU                                          k∇i1 ψ i2 ∇3 ∇i3 ψH ∇i4 ψH kL2 (Su,u0 ) du0 .
       0≤u≤U                                             0
 i≤2                                                         i1 +i2 +i3 +i4 ≤2

Using Gronwall’s inequality, we get
                             X
                                 sup k∇3 ∇i ψH kL2 (Su,u ) ≤ CU .
                                                0≤u≤U
                                            i≤2 0≤u≤u
                                                     ∗

In particular, combining the above estimates, we obtain
                          X
                                 sup k∇j ∇i (ψH , ψ)kL2 (Su,u∗ ) ≤ CU
                                               0≤u≤U
                                  i≤3−j, j≤1

on H u∗ , as desired.                                                                                                       
  Finally, we move to the proof of Theorem 4. First, we prove
Proposition 33. Suppose, in addition to the assumptions in Theorem 2, χ̂ initially obeys
                              Z u∗
                                   |χ̂ γ (u0 )|2 du0 = ∞,
                                                 0

along an outgoing null generator γ of H0 . Let Φu (γ) be the image of γ under the 1-parameter
family of diffeomorphism generated by L. Then
                       Z u∗
                            (trχ Φu (γ) (u0 ))2 + |χ̂ Φu (γ) (u0 )|2 du0 = ∞,
                                 0

holds for every 0 ≤ u < u∗ .
  Similarly suppose, in addition to the assumptions in Theorem 2, χ̂ initially obeys
                                  Z u∗
                                       |χ̂ γ (u0 )|2 du0 = ∞,
                                                 0
56                                              JONATHAN LUK

along an outgoing null generator γ of H 0 . Let Φu (γ) be the image of γ under the 1-parameter
family of diffeomorphism generated by L. Then
                       Z u∗
                            (trχ Φu (γ) (u0 ))2 + |χ̂ Φu (γ) (u0 )|2 du0 = ∞,
                             0
holds for every 0 ≤ u < u∗ .
Proof. Fix U ∈ (0, u∗ ). Suppose
                               Z u∗
                                          (trχ ΦU (γ) (u0 ))2 du0 < ∞.                               (60)
                                     0

We want to show that under the assumption (60), we have
                             Z u∗
                                  |χ̂ ΦU (γ) (u0 )|2 du0 = ∞,
                                      0
which will then imply the desired conclusion.
  Using (60), define h : [0, u∗ ) → R by
                                          h(u) = |trχ ΦU (γ) (u)|
such that                                  Z u∗
                                                  h(u0 )2 du0 < ∞.
                                            0
Consider the following null structure equation for trχ:
                            ∇3 trχ + trχtrχ = 2ωtrχ − 2K + 2div η + 2|η|2
Along the integral curve of −e3 emanating from Φu (γ), we thus have
  d RUu (Ωtrχ−2Ωω)Φ 0 (γ) (u)du0                     Ru
                                                         (Ωtrχ−2Ωω)Φ 0 (γ) (u)du0
    (e              u             trχ Φu (γ) (u)) = e U             u             (−2K + 2div η + 2|η|2 ).
 du
By the estimates derived in the proof of Theorem 5, K, ∇η, η are bounded and trχ, ω are
in L1u L∞ (S). Therefore,
                                   |trχ Φu (γ) (u)| ≤ Ch(u) for all u.                               (61)
Consider the following null structure equation for χ̂:
                                 1                       1
                         ∇3 χ̂ + trχχ̂ = ∇⊗ηb + 2ω χ̂ − trχχ̂ + η ⊗η.
                                                                   b
                                 2                       2
Contract this equation with χ̂ to get
                 1             1                           1
                   ∇3 |χ̂|2 + trχ|χ̂|2 − 2ω|χ̂|2 = (∇ b
                                                      ⊗η − trχχ̂ + η b⊗η) · χ̂,
                 2             2                           2
which implies
                               1                           1
                   |∇3 |χ̂| + trχ|χ̂| − 2ω|χ̂|| ≤ |∇ b
                                                    ⊗η| + | trχχ̂| + |η b
                                                                       ⊗η|.
                               2                           2
This implies that along the integral curve of e3 , we have
                        d RUu ( 12 Ωtrχ−2Ωω)Φ 0 (γ) (u)du0
                        | (e                  u             |χ̂| Φu (γ) (u))|
                       du
                         Ru 1
                           ( Ωtrχ−2Ωω)Φ 0 (γ) (u)du0                 1
                     ≤2e U 2              u            (|∇ b⊗η| + | trχχ̂| + |η b
                                                                               ⊗η|).
                                                                      2
                              WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                                 57

Using again the fact that K, ∇η, η, trχ, χ̂, ω are bounded for u ≤ U , as well as the estimate
(61), we have
    Ru 1
      ( Ωtrχ−2Ωω)Φ 0 (γ) (u)du0
                                                                 Ru 1                   0
 |(e U 2                  u           |χ̂| Φu (γ) (u)) − (e U ( 2 Ωtrχ−2Ωω)γ (u)du |χ̂| γ (u))| ≤ CU (1 + h(u)).
                    Ru 1                           0
                     U ( 2 Ωtrχ−2Ωω)Φ 0 (γ) (u)du
Notice that e                  u        is bounded above and below uniformly in u. Taking the
 2
Lu norm implies that for u ≤ U , we have
         Z u∗                          Z u∗                         Z u∗
                            0 2   0                  0 2   0
              |χ̂ Φu (γ) (u )| du ≥ c      |χ̂ γ (u )| du − C − C      h2 (u0 )du0 = ∞
               0                                       0                                    0
by the assumption of the proposition. The blow up for χ can be proved in a similar manner.
                                                                                        
  This implies
Proposition 34. Suppose the assumptions of Theorem 4 hold. Then, in a neighborhood of
any point on H u∗ , |χ|2 is not integrable with respect to the spacetime volume form. Similarly,
in a neighborhood of any point on Hu∗ , |χ|2 is not integrable with respect to the spacetime
volume form.
Proof. We begin with |χ|2 near Hu∗ . By definition, the image of the initial incoming null
generator under the map Φu defined in Proposition 33 has constant u, θ1 and θ2 values. Also,
                                                             √
by Propositions 1 and 2, the spacetime volume element 2Ω2 det γ is bounded uniformly
above and below. Therefore, for any neighborhood N of p = (u, u∗ , θ1 , θ2 ) ∈ H u∗ , we have
      Z
         ((trχ)2 + |χ̂|2 )
           N
           Z θ2 +δ Z θ1 +δ Z u+δ Z u∗
     ≥c                                         ((trχ)2 + |χ̂|2 )(u0 , u0 , (θ1 )0 , (θ2 )0 )du0 du0 d(θ1 )0 d(θ2 )0 = ∞,
            θ2 −δ     θ1 −δ     u−δ     u∗ −δ

by Proposition 33.
  To prove the corresponding statement for |χ|2 near H u∗ , we first change to the coordi-
                                                                   ∂
nate system (u, u, θ̃1 (u; u, θ), θ̃2 (u; u, θ)) such that L = ∂u      . This coordinate system can be
constructed by solving the ordinary differential equations
                                    d A
                                       θ̃ (u; u, θ) = −bA (u, u, θ̃1 , θ̃2 ),
                                   du
                        30
with initial condition
                                              θ̃A (0; u, θ) = θA .
By (37), as well as the estimates for ζ, Ω and their derivatives, bA and the following first
derivatives of bA are uniformly bounded:
                                                              ∂bA ∂bA
                                                   |bA |, |      |, | B | ≤ C.
                                                              ∂u     ∂θ
  30We note that since we do not have a global coordinate chart on S
                                                                           0,0 , the above ODE only makes sense
in (Φu ◦ Φu )(Ui ) ∩ (Φu ◦ Φu )(Uj ), where Ui , Uj are coordinate charts on S0,0 and Φu and Φu are as defined
in Proposition 33. Nevertheless, since Φu ◦ Φu and Φu ◦ Φu are both diffeomorphisms between S0,0 and Su,u ,
for every point p ∈ Su,u , there exists i and j such that p ∈ (Φu ◦ Φu )(Ui ) ∩ (Φu ◦ Φu )(Uj ), where this change
of coordinates makes sense.
58                                            JONATHAN LUK

Therefore,
                                        ∂ θ̃A ∂ θ̃A ∂ θ̃A
                                    |        |, |    |, | B | ≤ C.
                                        ∂u        ∂u     ∂θ
In the new coordinate system, we apply the same argument as in the case for |χ|2 near Hu∗
and have the estimate            Z
                                              ((trχ)2 +|χ̂|2 ) = ∞
                                          N
for any neighborhood N of any point p ∈ H u∗ , as desired.                                    

     Finally, this allows us to conclude that the Christoffel symbols do not belong to L2 :
Proposition 35. Suppose the assumptions of Theorem 4 hold. Then, the Christoffel symbols
in the (u, u, θ1 , θ2 ) coordinate system are not in L2 in a neighborhood of any point on Hu∗ or
H u∗ .

Proof. Recall that the metric in the (u, u, θ1 , θ2 ) coordinates takes the form
               g = −2Ω2 (du ⊗ du + du ⊗ du) + γAB (dθA − bA du) ⊗ (dθB − bB du).
Note that
                                       1
                               g uu = − Ω−2 ,        g uα = 0 for α 6= u.
                                       2
One computes that
                                 1    ∂       1 ∂         1
                         ΓuAB = − g uu gAB =   2
                                                   γAB =    χAB .
                                 2    ∂u     4Ω ∂u       2Ω
Since 21 ≤ Ω ≤ 2 and γ is uniformly bounded and positive definite, ΓuAB is not in L2 in
a neighborhood of any point on the singular boundary H u∗ in the (u, u, θ1 , θ2 ) coordinate
system.
  To show that the incoming hypersurface Hu∗ is singular, first notice that
                                  1                     1
                          g uu = − Ω−2 ,        g uA = − Ω−2 bA ,    g uu = 0.
                                  2                     2
We then compute
    u    1       ∂              ∂        ∂        1       ∂       ∂         ∂
  ΓAB  = g uu ( A gBu + B gAu −            gAB ) + g uC ( B gAC + A gBC − C gAB )
         2      ∂θ            ∂θ        ∂u        2      ∂θ      ∂θ       ∂θ
           1 ∂                ∂             ∂                 ∂       ∂          ∂
       = 2 ( γAB − B (γAC bC ) − A (γBC bC ) − bC ( B γAC + A γBC − C γAB ))
         4Ω ∂u              ∂θ             ∂θ                ∂θ      ∂θ        ∂θ
          1
       = χAB + regular terms,
         2Ω
where the regular terms denote metric components and their derivatives that are uniformly
bounded by the estimates proved in the previous sections. By the same reasoning as in the
case near H u∗ , ΓuAB is not in L2 in a neighborhood of any point on the singular boundary
Hu∗ in the (u, u, θ1 , θ2 ) coordinate system.
                                                                                        
     This concludes the proof of Theorem 4.
                        WEAK NULL SINGULARITIES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY                                          59

                                        10. Acknowledgments
   The author thanks Mihalis Dafermos for suggesting the problem and sharing many insights
from the works [7, 8, 9], as well as offering valuable comments on an earlier version of the
manuscript. He thanks Igor Rodnianski for very helpful suggestions. He also thanks Spyros
Alexakis, Amos Ori and Yakov Shlapentokh-Rothman for stimulating discussions. Finally,
he is grateful for the suggestions given by the anonymous referees.
   Most of the work was carried out when the author was at Princeton University and Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania. This work is supported by the NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship DMS-
1204493.

                                                References
 [1] A. Bonanno, S. Droz, W. Israel, and S. M. Morsink. Structure of the charged spherical black hole
     interior. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A, 450:553–567, 1995.
 [2] P. Brady and J. D. Smith. Black hole singularities: a numerical approach. Phys. Rev. Lett., 75(7):1256–
     1259, 1995.
 [3] L. M. Burko. Structure of the black holes Cauchy-horizon singularity. Phys. Rev. Lett., 79(25):4958–4961,
     1997.
 [4] S. Chandrasekhar and J. B. Hartle. On crossing the Cauchy horizon of a Reissner-Nördstrom black-hole.
     Proc. Royal Society of London A, 384(1787):301–315, 1982.
 [5] D. Christodoulou. The formation of black holes in general relativity. EMS Monographs in Mathematics.
     European Mathematical Society (EMS), Zürich, 2009, arXiv:0805.3880.
 [6] D. Christodoulou and S. Klainerman. The global nonlinear stability of the Minkowski space, volume 41
     of Princeton Mathematical Series. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1993.
 [7] M. Dafermos. Stability and instability of the Cauchy horizon for the spherically symmetric Einstein-
     Maxwell-scalar field equations. Ann. of Math. (2), 158(3):875–928, 2003.
 [8] M. Dafermos. The interior of charged black holes and the problem of uniqueness in general relativity.
     Comm. Pure Appl. Math., 58(4):445–504, 2005.
 [9] M. Dafermos. Black holes without spacelike singularities. Comm. Math Phys., 332:729–757, 2014,
     arXiv:1201.1797.
[10] M. Dafermos and I. Rodnianski. A proof of Price’s law for the collapse of self-gravitating scalar field.
     Invent. Math., 162:381–457, 2005.
[11] M. Dafermos and I. Rodnianski. The black hole stability problem for linear scalar perturbations. 2010,
     arXiv:1010.5137.
[12] W. A. Hiscock. Evolution of the interior of a charged black hole. Phys. Rev. Lett., 83A:110–112, 1981.
[13] S. Hod and T. Piran. Mass inflation in dynamical gravitational collapse of a charged scalar field. Phys.
     Rev. Lett., 81:1554–1557, 1998, gr-qc/9803004.
[14] K. A. Khan and R. Penrose. Scattering of two impulsive gravitational plane waves. Nature, 229:185–186,
     1971.
[15] S. Klainerman and F. Nicolò. The evolution problem in general relativity, volume 25 of Progress in
     Mathematical Physics. Birkhäuser Boston Inc., Boston, MA, 2003.
[16] S. Klainerman and I. Rodnianski. On the formation of trapped surfaces. Acta Mathematica, 208:211–333,
     2012, arXiv:0912.5097.
[17] J. Luk. On the local existence for the characteristic initial value problem in general relativity. Int. Math.
     Res. Notices, 2012(12):4625–4678, 2012, arXiv:1107.0898.
[18] J. Luk and I. Rodnianski. Nonlinear interaction of impulsive gravitational waves for the vacuum Einstein
     equations. 2013, arXiv:1301.1072.
[19] J. Luk and I. Rodnianski. Local propagation of impulsive gravitational waves. Comm. Pure. Appl. Math.,
     68:511–624, 2014, arXiv:1209.1130.
[20] J. McNamara. Instability of black hole inner horizons. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lon. A, 358:499–517, 1978.
[21] H. Müller zum Hagen. Characteristic initial value problem for hyperbolic systems of second order dif-
     ferential equations. Ann. Inst. Henri Poincaré, 53:159–216, 1990.
60                                            JONATHAN LUK

[22] A. Ori and É. É. Flanagan. How generic are null spacetime singularities? Phys. Rev. D, 53:1754–1758,
     1996.
[23] R. Penrose. Gravitational collapse and space-time singularities. Phys. Rev. Lett., 14:57–59, Jan 1965.
[24] R. Penrose. The geometry of impulsive gravitational waves. In General relativity (papers in honour of
     J. L. Synge), pages 101–115. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1972.
[25] E. Poisson and W. Israel. Inner-horizon instability and mass ination in black holes. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
     63:1663–1666, 1989.
[26] E. Poisson and W. Israel. Internal structure of black holes. Phys. Rev. D, 41:1796–1809, 1990.
[27] M. Simpson and R. Penrose. Internal instability in a Reissner-Nordström black hole. Internat. J. Theoret.
     Phys., 7:183–197, 1973.
[28] P. Szekeres. Colliding gravitational waves. Nature, 228:1183–1184, 1970.

     Department of Mathematics, Stanford University, Stanford CA 94305-2125, USA
     E-mail address: jluk@stanford.edu
