NON-POSITIVE CURVATURE IN GROUP THEORY

MARTIN R. BRIDSON1

Mathematical Institute, 24–29 St Giles’, Oxford, OX1 3LB England
ABSTRACT: This article is an edited account of the four lectures that I gave at the Groups St Andrews meeting in Bath

during the summer of 1997. The aim of these lectures was to introduce an audience of group theorists, with varying

backgrounds, to the role that non-positive curvature plays in the theory of discrete groups. A few new results are included,

but basically this is an expository article aimed as non-experts. These notes do not constitute a comprehensive survey of

curvature in group theory. Nevertheless, I hope that they give the reader a substantial and enticing taste of this active

area of research.




Introduction
In the last fifteen years the close connection between geometry and combinatorial
group theory, which was at the heart of the pioneering work of Dehn [52], has
re-emerged as a central theme in the study of infinite groups. Thus combinatorial
group theory has been joined by (and to a large extent has merged with) what
has become known as geometric group theory — this is the broad context of these
lectures. My basic goal will be to illustrate how various notions of non-positive
curvature can be used to illuminate and solve a range of group theoretic problems.
I shall also attempt to illustrate how group theory can serve as a potent tool for
exploring the geometry of non-positively curved spaces. I wish to promote the idea
that manifestations of non-positive curvature are deeply inherent in combinatorial
group theory, often in contexts where there is little reason, prima facie, to suppose
that the problems concerned have any geometric content whatsoever.
   This last point is particularly emphasized in the first lecture, which begins with
Dehn’s formulation of the basic decision problems at the heart of combinatorial
group theory: the word problem, the conjugacy problem and the isomorphism
problem. Following a general discussion of the foundations of geometric group
theory, I shall explain how Dehn’s approach to the word problem leads us naturally
to the theory of hyperbolic groups à la Gromov [68]. I shall briefly outline some
elements of this theory. Through hyperbolicity we enter the world of non-positive
curvature and Lecture 1 concludes with some illustrations of the way in which a
qualitative understanding of the geometry of non-positively curved manifolds can
lead us to striking group theoretic results.
   Gromov’s notion of hyperbolicity, which emerges in Lecture 1 from core consid-
erations in combinatorial group theory, encapsulates many of the features of the
global geometry of simply-connected spaces of negative curvature, whereas classi-
cally one thinks of curvature as a local or infinitesimal concept. In Lecture 2 we will
examine the geometry of spaces which are non-positively curved in a strict, local,
sense first identified by A. D. Alexandrov (see [2]). Much of the importance of this
    1
    The author is supported by an EPSRC Advanced Fellowship. His work on this subject has
also been supported by grants from the NSF (USA) and the FNRS (Switzerland).
more local approach to curvature rests on the existence of a local-to-global theorem
(the Generalized Cartan-Hadamard Theorem): if a complete geodesic space X is
non-positively curved (in a local sense), then its universal cover X  e is (a strong
non-positive curvature condition that implies much about the large-scale geometry
and topology of the space).
   A central theme in Lecture 2 is the closeness of the relationship between the
global geometry of CAT(0) spaces and the structure of the groups which act prop-
erly by isometries on them. Moreover, as the Generalized Cartan-Hadamard The-
orem indicates, the existence of a metric of non-positive curvature on a space tells
one a great deal about the topology of the space. Thus we are presented with
an environment in which group theory, geometry and topology are deeply inter-
connected. Such an environment is obviously an exciting one, but before one can
get too excited one needs to know that there is a substantial range of examples.
Thus in Lecture 3 we turn our attention to the construction and identification of
non-positively curved spaces, with particular emphasis on examples that are of
group-theoretic interest.
   Our point of departure in Lecture 1 will be Dehn’s original formulation of the
basic decision problems of combinatorial group theory. (This was also the point of
departure for much of twentieth century combinatorial group theory.) In Lecture 4
I shall return to the study of these basic problems in the context of non-positively
curved spaces and groups, and I shall describe the state of the art in this active
area.
   The origins of combinatorial group theory are deeply intertwined with those of
low-dimensional topology. In both subjects geometry, in particular non-positive
curvature, plays a central role that is not immediately evident2 . For most of this
century, though, curvature has played little role in the study of either subject.
Indeed, in the case of combinatorial group theory, the whole geometric vein in the
subject has lacked prominence. Its return to prominence in recent years is due
largely to the deep insights of Mikhael Gromov [67, 68, 69], and I should make it
clear that although his name and that of Max Dehn do not appear on every page
of these notes, their influence runs throughout.

Acknowledgements
A more comprehensive account of much of the material in these lectures can be
found in my book with André Haefliger [33]. Exploring the geometry of CAT(0)
spaces is an adventure that Haefliger and I have shared over the last five years and
I am deeply grateful to him for sharing his many insights. I am equally grateful
to both him and his wife, Minouche, for welcoming me so warmly into their home
during this time.
   Some of the material in Lecture 4 is based on joint work with Gilbert Baumslag,
Chuck Miller and Hamish Short; I would like to take this opportunity to thank them
for many hours of good-humoured conversation. Finally, I would like to thank the
organizers of Groups St Andrews in Bath. I particularly wish to thank Geoff Smith
  2
      In the case of 3-manifolds this insight is largely due to Thurston [111, 112].



                                                 125
for accommodating my disorganization both in Bath and in the process of getting
this article finished within a (strenuous) stone’s throw of the deadline.

The tone of the lectures
The level and tone of the lectures reflect both the background of the audience and
my own tastes and prejudices. First the audience: each of them might acquiesce
in the title “group theorist”, but within that category one would find many whose
daily thoughts revolve entirely around finite groups, while others might consider
themselves to be topologists. From the point of view of these lectures, the impor-
tance of this diversity is that it would be unreasonable to assume that a majority
of the audience were well-acquainted with ideas from topology and geometry (be-
yond such basic concepts as the fundamental group of a space). I shall assume
no knowledge of differential geometry. Various comments in the text will only be
transparent to readers who are familiar with the rudiments of hyperbolic geometry,
but for the most part such a familiarity is not required. At some points in lectures
3 and 4 I shall need some low dimensional topology and the reader who finds this
to be a problem may wish to omit the sections concerned.
   With regard to my own tastes and prejudices: I came to group theory, more
precisely combinatorial group theory, through problems in geometry and topology.
Moreover, I am by nature inclined to seek geometry underlying any given piece
of mathematics. I hope that admitting this subjectivity will not weaken my con-
tention that geometry is inherent (though not always immediately apparent) in
many aspects of group theory and that to ignore it can be debilitating.


Lecture 1: In the beginning there was Max Dehn
I shall begin be explaining what I mean by combinatorial and geometric group
theory, and by framing some of the central issues in each subject. I particularly wish
to emphasize the common origins of these subjects and the natural interdependence
of them.
   First, combinatorial group theory: roughly speaking, combinatorial group theory
is the study of groups given by generators and defining relations. Thus a group Γ is
described to us by means of a set A and a subset R of the free group F on A; to say
that hA | Ri is a presentation of Γ means that Γ is isomorphic to the quotient of F
by the smallest normal subgroup containing R. This method of describing groups
emerged from work on discrete groups of isometries of hyperbolic space, and was
first articulated by von Dyck in [56], which is generally regarded as the first paper
in combinatorial group theory. For a comprehensive history of the subject up to
1980, see [46].

1.1   Decision problems
It was some years after von Dyck’s original paper that Max Dehn framed the
central issues of combinatorial group theory that have occupied researchers in the
field for most of this century. Building on work of Poincaré [97, 98], Dehn was

                                         126
working on the basic problems of recognition and classification for low-dimensional
manifolds (see [52]). In that setting, one finds that for many purposes the key
invariant is the fundamental group of the space at hand. Moreover, when one is
presented with the space in a concrete way, the fundamental group often emerges
in the form of a presentation. In the course of his attempts to recover knowledge
about fundamental groups (and hence manifolds) from such presentations, Dehn
came to realize that the problems that he was wrestling with were manifestations
of fundamental problems in the theory of groups. Let us recall the manner in which
Dehn originally formulated the three basic problems of this kind.

1.2      “Über unendliche diskontinuierliche Gruppen”, (Dehn, 1912)
“The general discontinuous group is given by n generators and m relations between
them, as defined by Dyck (Math. Ann., 20 and 22). The results of those works,
however, relate essentially to finite groups. The general theory of groups defined in
this way at present appears very undeveloped in the infinite case. Here there are
above all three fundamental problems whose solution is very difficult and which will
not be possible without a penetrating study of the subject.

1. The identity [word] problem: An element of the group is given as a product
of generators. One is required to give a method whereby it may be decided in a
finite number of steps whether this element is the identity or not.

2. The transformation [conjugacy] problem: Any two elements S and T of
the group are given. A method is sought for deciding the question whether S and T
can be transformed into each other, i.e. whether there is an element U of the group
satisfying the relation S = U T U −1 .

3. The isomorphism problem: Given two groups, one is to decide whether they
are isomorphic or not (and further, whether a given correspondence between the
generators of one group and elements of the other is an isomorphism or not).

   These three problems have very different degrees of difficulty. [. . .] One is already
led to them by necessity with work in topology. Each knotted space curve, in order
to be completely understood, demands the solution of the three above problems in a
special case.”
   I particularly wish to emphasize Dehn’s last two remarks: the degree of dif-
ficulty of these three problems varies considerably, and each arises naturally in
low-dimensional topology. I would also like to add something to the second re-
mark: Dehn was studying surface groups and knot groups, and surfaces of positive
genus and knot-complements3 all support metrics of non-positive curvature. Thus
the context in which Dehn was working was deeply imbued with non-positive cur-
vature.
  3
      viewed as compact manifolds with boundary




                                             127
 1.3    Dehn’s algorithm for solving the word problem
 This is perhaps the most direct approach that one can hope for whereby the in-
 formation in a finite presentation is used directly to solve the word problem in the
 group presented. We shall see in subsequent sections that this direct algebraic ap-
 proach to the word problem provides a remarkable bridge into the world of negative
 curvature (1.21).
     Given a finite set of generators A for a group Γ, one would have a particularly
 efficient algorithm for solving the word problem if one could construct a finite
 list of words u1 , v1 , u2 , v2 , . . . , un , vn , with ui = vi as elements of Γ, with lengths
 |vi | < |ui |, and with the property that if a word w represents the identity in Γ then
 at least one of the ui is a subword of w.
     If such a list of words exists, then given an arbitrary word w one looks for a
 subword of the form ui ; if there is no such subword, one stops and declares that w
 does not represent the identity; if ui occurs as a subword of w, then one replaces
 it with vi and repeats the search for subwords of the new (shorter) word — this
 new word represents the same element of the group as w. After at most |w| steps
 one will either have reduced w to the empty word or else verified that w does not
 represent the identity.
     This is the algorithm that Dehn used to solve the word problem for surface
 groups [53].

 Definition 1.4 A finite presentation hA | Ri of a group Γ is called a Dehn pre-
 sentation if R = {u1 v1−1 , . . . , un vn−1 }, where the words u1 , v1 , . . . , un , vn satisfy the
 conditions of Dehn’s algorithm.

   Readers should ask themselves how one might decide whether or not Z2 has a
 (possibly obscure) Dehn presentation. (In fact it does not.) As further food for
 thought, let me mention some consequences of having a Dehn presentation.

 Theorem 1.5 If a group Γ has a Dehn presentation, then: numdepth ¿3 oodeep
1. Γ does not contain Z2 ;
2. Γ has a solvable conjugacy problem;
3. Γ has only finitely many conjugacy classes of finite subgroups;
4. H ∗ (Γ, Q) is finitely generated and finite dimensional.

   I have chosen to mention these properties because in each case the hypothesis
 and conclusion are purely algebraic, whereas the proof of each assertion goes via
 the global geometry of the group, as we shall see later.
   In order to tease out the geometry inherent in Dehn’s algorithm, we need the
 basic vocabulary of geometric group theory.




                                                128
Geometric group theory
This is a subject close to combinatorial group theory whose distinct identity has
been forged in the last ten years. It is based to a large extent on two strands of
thought.
   The first is that by getting a group to act on a space (preferably by isometries)
one can often use knowledge of the space to elucidate the nature of the group, or
else use knowledge of the group to elucidate the nature of the space.
   The second idea begins with the observation (due to Cayley (1878) and Dehn
(1910)) that one can regard any finitely generated group as a metric space. As the
result of efforts inspired largely by the writings of Gromov, we now know that one
can glean a remarkable amount of algebraic information by studying the asymptotic
geometry of groups regarded as metric spaces. Gromov outlined this idea in his
article “Infinite groups as geometric objects” for the proceedings of the ICM in
Warsaw [67], and he explored it in much greater detail in his two subsequent essays
“Hyperbolic groups” [68] and “Asymptotic invariants of infinite groups” [69].

1.6    The word metric
Given a group Γ with finite generating set A, one realizes the group as a geometric
object by endowing it with the left-invariant metric:

                      d(g, h) = inf{|w| | w ∈ F (A), w = g −1 h in Γ},

where |w| is the length of the word w.
   In many contexts it is easier to work with geodesic metric spaces4 rather than
simple metric spaces. With this in mind, one often replaces the metric space (Γ, d)
with its Cayley graph.

Cayley graphs (Gruppenbilder)
Arthur Cayley introduced these graphs in 1878 “to study the quasi-geometry” of
(finite) groups. Dehn, who was aware of Cayley’s work, made extensive use of them
in his work on Fuchsian groups twenty years later.

Definition 1.7 The Cayley graph CA (Γ) of a group Γ with respect to a generating
set A is the metric graph whose vertices are in 1-1 correspondence with Γ and which
has an edge (labelled a) of length one joining γ to γa for each γ ∈ Γ and a ∈ A.

Example 1.8 The Cayley graph of Z2 with respect to the standard generators is
(isometric to) the 1-skeleton of the tiling of the plane by unit squares, endowed with
the `1 -metric.

Remark The word metric dA on Γ is the restriction to Γ (the vertex set) of the
metric on the Cayley graph CA (Γ).
   4
     A metric space X is called a geodesic space if every pair of points x, y ∈ X can be joined by
a geodesic, i.e. a map c : [0, D] → X such that c(0) = x, c(D) = y and d(c(t), c(t0 )) = |t − t0 | for
all t, t0 ∈ [0, D].


                                                129
   Note that the action of Γ on itself by left multiplication gives an embedding
Γ → Isom(Γ, dA ), and this action extends to an action of Γ by isometries on the
Cayley graph. (The action of γ0 ∈ Γ by right multiplication γ 7→ γγ0 is an isometry
only if γ0 lies in the centre of Γ.)
   The point of introducing word metrics and Cayley graphs is to realize finitely
generated groups as geometric objects. Since we are interested in groups Γ rather
than pairs (Γ, A), where A is a choice of generators, the geometry that we introduce
ought to be, as far as possible, independent of the choice of generators. The key
observation in this regard is that the word metrics associated to different choices
of finite generating sets are Lipschitz equivalent, and the corresponding Cayley
graphs are quasi-isometric in the following sense.

Definition 1.9 (quasi-isometry) Let (X1 , d1 ) and (X2 , d2 ) be metric spaces. A
(not necessarily continuous) map f : X1 → X2 is called a (λ, ε)-quasi-isometric
embedding if there exist constants λ ≥ 1 and ε ≥ 0 such that for all x, y ∈ X1
                    1
                      d1 (x, y) − ε ≤ d2 (f (x), f (y)) ≤ λd1 (x, y) + ε.
                    λ
If, in addition, there exists a constant C ≥ 0 such that every point of X2 lies in
the C–neighbourhood of the image of f , then f is called a (λ, ε)-quasi-isometry.
When such a map exists, X1 and X2 are said to be quasi-isometric.

    The following remarks show in particular that quasi-isometry is an equivalence
relation on any set of metric spaces.
    (1) If there exists a (λ, ε)–quasi-isometry f : X1 → X2 then there exists a (λ0 , ε0 )–
quasi-isometry f 0 : X2 → X1 (for some λ0 and ε0 ) and a constant k ≥ 0 such that
d(f f 0 (x0 ), x0 ) ≤ k and d(f 0 f (x), x) ≤ k for all x ∈ X1 and all x0 ∈ X2 . Such a map
f 0 is called a quasi-inverse for f .
    (2) The composition of a (λ, ε) quasi-isometric embedding and a (λ0 , ε0 ) quasi-
isometric embedding is a (μ, ν) quasi-isometric embedding with μ = λλ0 and ν =
λ0 ε + ε0 . The composition of two quasi-isometries is a quasi-isometry.
    (3) Let X be a metric space. Say that two maps f, g : X → X are equivalent,
f ∼ g, if supx d(f (x), g(x)) is finite. Let [f ] denote the ∼ equivalence class of f .
The quasi-isometry group of X, denoted QI(X), is the set of ∼ equivalence classes
of quasi-isometries X → X. Composition of maps induces a group structure on
X, and any quasi-isometry φ : X → X 0 induces an isomorphism φ∗ : QI(X) →
QI(X 0 ).

Example 1.10 The inclusion of a subspace Y into a metric space X is a quasi-
isometry if and only if Y is quasi-dense, i.e. there exists a constant C > 0 such
that every point of X lies in the C−neighbourhood of Y . For example, the natural
inclusion Z ,→ R is a quasi-isometry (for the metric d(x, y) = |x − y|). In fact, the
natural inclusion (Γ, dA ) ,→ CA (Γ) of any finitely generated group as the vertex set
its Cayley graph is a (1, 12 ) quasi-isometry.

Proposition 1.11 A homomorphism ϕ : Γ1 → Γ2 of finitely generated groups is a
quasi-isometry if and only if ker(φ) and Γ2 /im(ϕ) are both finite.

                                            130
   This proposition can be proved directly without difficulty, but it can also be
viewed in terms of the natural action of Γ2 by isometries on its Cayley graph
CA (Γ2 ): via φ there is an induced action of Γ1 on CA (Γ2 ); this induced action
is proper and cocompact (in the sense defined below) if and only if ker(φ) and
Γ2 /im(ϕ) are both finite. Thus (1.11) provides us with our first illustration of the
fact that quasi-isometries arise naturally from proper cocompact group actions.

A bridge between the two aspects of geometric group theory
Definition 1.12 A metric space is called proper if all of its closed bounded subsets
are compact. When a group Γ acts on a space X by isometries, one endows the
quotient (set of orbits) Γ\X with the (pseudo)metric:

                     d(Γ.x, Γ.x0 ) = inf{d(y, y 0 ) | y ∈ Γ.x, y 0 ∈ Γ.x0 }.

The action of Γ is called proper if for each bounded set B ⊂ X, the set {γ ∈ Γ |
γ.B ∩ B 6= ∅} is finite. If Γ\X is a compact metric space then the action is said to
be cocompact.

   The following result was discovered by the Russian school in the nineteen fifties
(see [58],[110]). It was rediscovered by John Milnor [87] some years later in the
course of his investigations into the geometry of nilpotent groups.

Proposition 1.13 (Švarc-Milnor Lemma) Let (X, d) be a geodesic space. If Γ
acts properly and cocompactly by isometries on X, then Γ is finitely generated and
for any choice of basepoint x0 ∈ X the map γ 7→ γ.x0 is a quasi-isometry.

Proof The idea of the proof is as follows. First we fix a point x0 ∈ X and a ball B
of radius D centred at x0 , where D is large enough to ensure that X is the union
of the translates by Γ of the ball of radius D/3 about x0 . (B exists because the
action is cocompact.) The set A := {a ∈ Γ | B ∩ a.B 6= ∅} is finite because the
action of Γ is proper, and in a moment we’ll show that A generates Γ. If two balls
γ.B and γ 0 .B intersect then γ 0 = γa for some a ∈ A, and by drawing a line labelled
a from γ.x0 to γ 0 .x0 for each such γ and γ 0 we obtain a copy of the Cayley graph
CA (Γ) immersed in X. We then have to check that this version of CA (Γ) is not too
distorted. In one direction we have:

Lemma 1.14 Let (X, d) be a metric space. Let Γ be a group with finite generating
set A and associated word metric dA . If Γ acts by isometries on X, then for every
choice of basepoint x0 ∈ X there exists a constant μ > 0 such that d(γ.x0 , γ 0 .x0 ) ≤
μ dA (γ, γ 0 ) for all γ, γ 0 ∈ Γ.

Proof Let μ = max{d(x0 , a.x0 ) | a ∈ A ∪ A−1 }. If dA (γ, γ 0 ) = n then γ −1 γ 0 =
a1 a2 . . . an for some aj ∈ A ∪ A−1 . Let gi = a1 a2 . . . ai . By the triangle in-
equality, d(γ.x0 , γ 0 .x0 ) = d(x0 , γ −1 γ 0 .x0 ) ≤ d(x0 , g1 .x0 ) + d(g1 .x0 , g2 .x0 ) + ∙ ∙ ∙ +
                                                                                        −1
d(gn−1 .x0 , γ −1 γ 0 .x0 ). And for each i we have d(gi−1 .x0 , gi .x0 ) = d(x0 , gi−1     gi .x0 ) =
d(x0 , ai .x0 ) ≤ μ. Thus the lemma is proved.                                                       2

                                                131
   To complete the proof of the proposition we must show that A generates Γ
and we must bound dA (γ, γ 0 ) in terms of d(γ.x0 , γ 0 .x0 ). Because both metrics are
Γ-invariant, it is enough to compare dA (1, γ) and d(x0 , γ.x0 ).
   Given γ ∈ Γ, let c : [0, l] → X be a geodesic joining x0 to γ.x0 . We choose a
partition 0 = t0 < t1 < . . . < tn = l of [0, l] such that d(c(ti ), c(ti+1 )) ≤ D/3 for all
i. For each ti we choose an element γi ∈ Γ such that d(c(ti ), γi .x0 ) ≤ D/3; choose
γ0 = 1 and γn = γ. Then, for i = 1, . . . , n we have d(γi .x0 , γi−1 .x0 ) ≤ D and hence
       −1
ai := γi−1 γi ∈ A. Thus A generates Γ:

                γ = γ0 (γ0−1 γ1 ) . . . (γn−2
                                          −1          −1
                                              γn−1 )(γn−1 γn ) = a1 . . . an−1 an .

   If we take as coarse a partition 0 = t0 < t1 < . . . < tn = l as possible with
d(c(ti ), c(ti+1 )) ≤ D/3, then n ≤ (3/D)d(x0 , γ.x0 ) + 1. Since γ can be expressed
as a word of length n, we get dA (1, γ) ≤ (d(x0 , γ.x0 ) + 1) (3/D) + 1.           2

1.15     Some consequences of the Švarc-Milnor Lemma
numdepth ¿3 oodeep
Zn is quasi-isometric to Euclidean n-space En .
If G is a Lie group that any cocompact lattice Γ ⊂ G is quasi-isometric to G.
Let Tn denote the connected metric tree in which every vertex has valence n and
every edge has length 1. If n, m ≥ 3 then Tn is quasi-isometric to Tm .
   To prove (3), note that the Cayley graph of the free group Fr of rank r is T2r , so
the case where n and m are even follows from the fact that every finitely generated
free group of rank ≥ 2 is a subgroup of finite index in F2 . Hence all such groups
(and their Cayley graphs) are quasi-isometric.
   In the case where n is odd, Tn is quasi-isometric to the Cayley graph of G2,n =
Z2 ∗ Zn , which has a finitely generated free subgroup of finite index, namely the
kernel of the abelianization map G2,n → Z2 × Zn .
   A surprising number of group-theoretical properties that one might think had
nothing to do with geometry turn out to be invariants of quasi-isometry, for example
finite presentability, the existence of a nilpotent subgroup of finite index [70], the
solvability of the word problem [3], the existence of an abelian subgroup of finite
index ([93], [32]) and the existence of representations as lattices in various semi-
simple Lie groups (see [60] for references). I quote these results to exemplify the
theme that geometry is lying just under the surface of much of group theory.

Classical curvature
Let us now turn our attention to the main subject of these lectures non-positive
curvature5 .
   Figure 1.4 portrays the fact that classical (sectional) curvature can be quantified
in terms of the geometry of triangles. With this in mind, in seeking generalized
   5
     Terminology: In English one normally uses the term “negative curvature” to mean curvature
strictly less than zero and one says “non-positive curvature” when one wishes to include zero. The
French term “courbure negative” should normally be translated as “non-positive curvature”


                                               132
                 Classical Curvature
                 Classical Curvature
                             c1
c1      c2       Classical Curvature
                             cc                                     c1
                                                                 c2 c
                               12


c1      c2                    c2
                                                                 c2
                                                                      1

                                      c1
        c2                            c2                              c1
c1
                Fig. 1.1: Sectional curvature
                 Figure 1.1: Sectional curvature κ               c2
                Fig. 1.1: Sectional curvature

             c1                      c1                                c1
                Fig. 1.1: Sectional curvature
             c1                      c1                    r           c
                                                                 ~e   r 1

                                                           r
                                                                 ~er
          c12                         cc1                r       cc1
          c                                              r
                                        2

   Fig. 1.2:2 The divergence of geodesics      in each case
                                                                   2

                                       c2
                                                             ~er c2
   Fig. 1.2: The divergence of geodesics in each r     case
      Figure 1.2: The divergence of geodesics in each case

          c2                           c2                         c2
concave
   Fig. 1.2: The divergence linear
                               of geodesics in each caseconvex
concave                     linear                      convex

concave t                   linear       t                   convex        t
   Fig. 1.3:t The function t d(c1(t),tc2(t)) in each case                  t
   Fig. 1.3: The function t d(c1(t),c2(t)) in each case
           t                             t                                 t
    Figure 1.3: The function t 7→ d(c1 (t), c2 (t)) in each case

     Fig. 1.3: The function t d(c1(t),c2(t)) in each case




                Fig. 1.4: Triangles in each case
                Fig. 1.4: Triangles in each case

                Fig. 1.4: Triangles in each case
                 Figure 1.4: Triangles in each case




                                133
                   Figure 1.5: A triangle in a hyperbolic space



notions of non-positive curvature we concentrate our attention on the geometry
of triangles. By definition, a (geodesic) triangle Δ = Δ(p, q, r) in a metric space
X consists of three points p, q, r ∈ X, its vertices, and a choice of three geodesic
segments joining them, its sides.

Generalized notions of non-positive curvature
We shall be primarily concerned with two generalizations of non-positive curvature.
The first generalization we consider is Gromov’s notion of hyperbolicity, a global
manifestation of strictly negative curvature. Gromov’s approach is essentially to
ignore the local structure of the space and to try instead to encapsulate the essence
of negative curvature by requiring that triangles in the spaces under consideration
behave on the large scale like geodesic triangles in real hyperbolic space Hn .

1.16    Definition of hyperbolicity
Given δ > 0, a geodesic metric space X is said to be δ−hyperbolic if for every
geodesic triangle Δ ⊆ X, each edge of Δ is contained in the δ−neighbourhood of
the union of the other two sides (see Figure 1.5). X is said to be hyperbolic (in the
sense of Gromov) if it is δ−hyperbolic for some δ.
   A finitely generated group is said to be hyperbolic (or “word hyperbolic”) if
its Cayley graph is hyperbolic in the above sense. (We shall see in (1.27) that
hyperbolicity is an invariant of quasi-isometry among geodesic spaces and therefore
this definition of a hyperbolic group does not depend on a choice of generators.)
   I should mention that there are a number of useful variations on the definition
given above. (Gromov credits Rips with the definition that we have given, “the


                                        134
slim triangles condition”.) For an account of these variations, and a proof of their
equivalence, we refer to [22], [33, III.H], [49], [64] and [106]. In these lectures I
shall give only a very brief introduction to the theory of hyperbolic spaces and
groups. For more details see the references listed above. Gromov’s original article
[68] is not easy to read, but contains an abundance of fascinating ideas beyond
those examined in the above references.

Exercise 1.17 Find δ0 such that the hyperbolic plane H2 is δ0 -hyperbolic. (Hint:
Because the area of a hyperbolic triangle is less than π, there is a bound on the size
of semi-circles that one can inscribe in a triangle.)

   The second notion of curvature that we shall consider in these notes is local
in nature. This approach is due to A.D. Alexandrov [2] (and to a lesser extent
Busemann [40]); it is the subject of my book with Haefliger [33] (see also [6]). The
idea is to compare triangles in the given space to triangles in the Euclidean plane
E2 . If all small triangles in the given space are no fatter than their comparison
triangles in E2 , then the space is said to be non-positively curved. More precisely:
   Let X be a metric space. A comparison triangle in E2 for a geodesic triangle Δ =
Δ(p, q, r) in X is a triangle Δ = Δ(p, q, r) in E2 such that d(p, q) = d(p, q), d(q, r) =
d(q, r) and d(p, r) = d(p, r). Note that Δ is unique up to isometry. A point x ∈ [q, r]
is called a comparison point for x ∈ [q, r] if d(q, x) = d(q, x). Comparison points
on [p, q] and [p, r] are defined in the same way.

Definition 1.18 (CAT(0) space) Let X be a metric space. Let Δ ⊂ E2 be a
geodesic triangle in X. Let Δ ⊂ Mκ2 be a comparison triangle for Δ. Then Δ
is said to satisfy the CAT(0) inequality if for all x, y ∈ Δ and comparison points
x, y ∈ Δ,
                                 d(x, y) ≤ d(x, y).
   If X is a geodesic space and all geodesic triangles in X satisfy the CAT(0)
inequality, then X is said to be a CAT(0) space.6
   A metric space X is said to be non-positively curved (in the sense of Alexandrov)
if it is locally a CAT(0) space, i.e. for every x ∈ X there exists rx > 0 such that
the ball B(x, rx ), endowed with the induced metric, is a CAT(0) space. Henceforth,
whenever I say that a space is non-positively curved, I shall mean this in the sense
of Alexandrov.


Remarks (1) Standard comparison theorems in Riemannian geometry show that
a complete Riemannian manifold is non-positively curved in the above sense if and
only if all of its sectional curvatures are non-positive (see [48] or [33, II.1A]).
   (2) By taking comparison triangles in the hyperbolic plane instead of the Eu-
clidean plane, one obtains the notion of a CAT(−1) space and curvature ≤ −1.
More generally, by taking comparison triangles in the plane of constant sectional
curvature κ one gets the notion of a CAT(κ) space and curvature ≤ κ.
  6
   This terminology is due to Gromov. The initials are in honour of Cartan, Alexandrov and
Toponogov.


                                           135
                                           d    d
                                                            x             y
                   x          y                                    d
                        d




                        X
                                                                  E
                                                                      2




                            Figure 1.6: The CAT(0) inequality



    By reversing the direction of the inequality in (1.18) one gets the notion of
 curvature ≥ 0. The study of spaces with lower curvature bounds is also interesting
 (see [38]), but has less to do with group theory.

 Lemma 1.19 CAT(−1) spaces are δ0 -hyperbolic, where δ0 is as in (1.17).

    In the remainder of this lecture I shall concentrate on δ-hyperbolic spaces. First
 though, to whet the reader’s appetite for CAT(0) spaces, let me state a group-
 theoretic result that I will explain later in the context of CAT(0) spaces.
    Let P = hA | Ri be a presentation for Γ, with R 6= ∅. Regard the elements of
 R as cyclic words and consider the following graph W (P): the vertex set of W (P)
 is {a, a | a ∈ A}; the edges of W (P) are in 1–1 correspondence with the subwords
 of length two in the cyclic words r ∈ R — for each occurrence of (ab−1 )±1 there
 is an edge connecting a to b, and for each occurrence of (ab)±1 there is an edge
 connecting a to b.

 Theorem 1.20 If each r ∈ R has length at least 4 and W (P) contains no circuits
 of length less than 4, then numdepth ¿3 oodeep
1. Γ is torsion-free;
2. Γ and all of its f.p. subgroups have solvable word and conjugacy problems;
3. H n (Γ, Z) = 0 for n ≥ 3; and
4. if Γ contains a solvable subgroup of finite index, then |A| = 2, |R| = 1 and Γ ∼
                                                                                  = Z2
 or Z o Z.

 Dehn’s algorithm: the word problem and negative curvature
 We now have a sufficient vocabulary to explain how negative curvature is hidden in
 the obvious solution to the word problem that one gets from a Dehn presentation.

 Theorem 1.21 (Gromov, Cannon, Dehn) A group is hyperbolic if and only if
 it admits a (finite) Dehn presentation.



                                          136
   Max Dehn proved that Fuchsian groups admit Dehn presentations [53]. Jim
Cannon extended Dehn’s theorem to include the fundamental groups of all compact
negatively curved manifolds [42, 43]. In the generality stated above, the theorem
is due to Gromov [68]. (Cannon gave a proof in [43] and alternative proofs can be
found elsewhere, e.g. [106].)

Proof [an outline] A detailed proof requires more elements of the geometry of
hyperbolic spaces than we shall establish here, but we indicate the main points.
   First suppose that the Cayley graph of Γ with respect to some finite generating
set A is δ-hyperbolic. By studying the geometry of quasi-geodesics in hyperbolic
spaces one sees (Corollary 1.30) that every closed loop in the Cayley graph CA (Γ)
contains a subpath of length at most 8δ that is not a geodesic (and whose endpoints
are at vertices). It follows that we obtain a Dehn presentation hA | Ri for Γ by
defining R to be the set of words ui vi−1 , where ui varies over all words of length at
most 8δ in the generators and their inverses and vi is a word that is equal to ui in
Γ and whose length |vi | is less than |ui |.
   The proof of the converse is less direct; it goes via the linear isoperimetric in-
equality.                                                                            2

Definition 1.22 (Isoperimetric inequalities) A finitely presented group Γ =
hA | Ri is said to satisfy a linear isoperimetric inequality if there exists a constant
K such that every word w in the kernel of the natural map F (A) → Γ can be
expressed in the free group F (A) as a product of at most K|w| conjugates of relators
r ∈ R±1 .

   Quadratic, polynomial and (sub)exponential isoperimetric inequalities are all
defined similarly. In the quadratic case, for example, the requirement is that w can
be expressed as a product of at most K|w|2 conjugates of relators.
   One can show that this definition (but not the value of the constant K) is
independent of the given finite presentation of Γ. Indeed the optimal type of
isoperimetric inequality satisfied by a finitely presented group is an invariant of
quasi-isometry [3].
   It is obvious that if a finitely presented group has a Dehn presentation then
the group satisfies a linear isoperimetric inequality. Thus the following result of
Gromov completes the proof of (1.21).

Theorem 1.23 If a group satisfies a linear isoperimetric inequality then it is hy-
perbolic.

  An elementary proof of this result, due to Hamish Short, can be found in an
appendix to [63]. (See also Lysenok [82].)

Remark Gromov [67] found a useful companion for Theorem 1.23: if a group sat-
isfies a sub-quadratic isoperimetric inequality then it satisfies a linear isoperimetric
inequality. For a proof see [23], [90] or [95].

  In Lecture 4 we shall discuss the conjugacy problem and the isomorphism prob-
lem in the class of hyperbolic groups.

                                          137
Quasi-geodesics in δ-hyperbolic spaces
The essence of a geodesic space is encoded in the geometry of its geodesics. What
do we wish to know about geodesics in hyperbolic spaces? Well, we are primar-
ily interested in groups, and a finitely generated group is only well-defined as a
geometric object up to quasi-isometry. Moreover, our main tool for relating the
geometry of groups to the geometry of the spaces on which they act (1.13) also
concerns only the quasi-isometry type of the group. Thus we are led to ask which
properties of geodesics are preserved by quasi-isometries.

Definition 1.24 (quasi-geodesic) A (λ, ε) quasi-geodesic in a metric space X is
a (λ, ε) quasi-isometric embedding c : I → X, where I is an interval of the real line
(bounded or unbounded) or Z. More explicitly,
                      1
                        |t − t0 | − ε ≤ d(c(t), c(t0 )) ≤ λ |t − t0 | + ε
                      λ
for all t, t0 ∈ I. If I = [a, b] then c(a) and c(b) are called the endpoints of c.

  In general quasi-geodesics need not resemble geodesics.

Exercise 1.25 Consider the spiral [0, ∞) → E2 given in polar coordinates by t 7→
(t, log(1 + t)). Prove that this is a quasi-geodesic.

  In hyperbolic spaces quasi-geodesics approximate geodesics closely — this is a
key difference between Euclidean and hyperbolic geometry.

Theorem 1.26 (Stability of quasi-geodesics) For all δ > 0, λ ≥ 1, ε ≥ 0 there
exists a constant R = R(δ, λ, ε) such that the following statement holds. If X is a
δ-hyperbolic geodesic space, c is a (λ, ε) quasi-geodesic in X and [p, q] is a geodesic
segment joining the endpoints of c, then [p, q] lies in the R-neighbourhood of the
image of c and vice versa.

   It follows from this theorem that a group is hyperbolic if and only if for every
λ, ε > 0, the (λ, ε) quasi-geodesic triangles in its Cayley graph are uniformly slim.
This property is obviously preserved under quasi-isometry, therefore:

Corollary 1.27 Hyperbolicity is an invariant of quasi-isometry amongst geodesic
spaces (in particular Cayley graphs, hence finitely generated groups). More gen-
erally, if X and Y are geodesic spaces, X is hyperbolic and Y ,→ X is a quasi-
isometric embedding, then Y is hyperbolic.

  The following result gives a local criterion for recognising quasi-geodesics.

Definition 1.28 Let X be a metric space and fix k > 0. A path c : [a, b] → X
is said to be a k-local geodesic if d(c(t), c(t0 )) = |t − t0 | for all t, t0 ∈ [a, b] with
|t − t0 | ≤ k.


                                             138
Theorem 1.29 (8δ-local geodesics are q.g.) Let X be a δ-hyperbolic geodesic
space and let c : [a, b] → X be a 8δ-local geodesic. Then c is a (λ, ε)-quasi-geodesic,
where λ depends only on δ and ε < 8δ.

  For a proof see [49], [64], [106] or [33, III.H].

Corollary 1.30 If X is a δ-hyperbolic geodesic space, then no path c : [a, b] → X
with a 6= b and c(a) = c(b) is an 8δ-local geodesic.

  In Lecture 4 we shall discuss the conjugacy problem and the isomorphism prob-
lem in the class of hyperbolic groups.

Quasification and finite subgroups of hyperbolic groups
I wish to illustrate how profitable it can be to transport classical arguments from the
theory of non-positively curved manifolds into the world of hyperbolic and related
groups. The key to all such adaptations is that one must find an appropriate way
to “quasify” the key role that non-positive (or negative) curvature is playing in
the classical setting; one then attempts to encapsulate a robust form of the salient
feature of curvature in the more relaxed world of hyperbolic spaces. The first
example of this is the very definition of δ-hyperbolic space: instead of insisting
that geodesic triangles satisfy the CAT(−1) inequality, which imposes tight control
on the local structure of the space, one observes that many important aspects of
the global geometry of CAT(−1) spaces rely only on the fact that the triangles
are uniformly slim – thus one arrives at a notion of negative curvature (namely
δ-hyperbolicity) that is much more robust, indeed quasi-isometry invariant.
   To illustrate how this general philosophy of quasification can be useful, we prove
the following:

Theorem 1.31 If a finitely generated group Γ is hyperbolic, then it contains only
finitely many conjugacy classes of finite subgroups.

   The proof is adapted from the following classical argument of Elie Cartan [44].
Suppose that we have a finite (more generally, compact) group of isometries G of
a complete Riemannian manifold X of non-positive curvature. Fix x ∈ X and
consider G.x ⊂ X. This is a bounded set, and in a complete Riemannian manifold
of non-positive curvature there are various intrinsic notions of “centre” that one can
associate to bounded sets. We focus on the circumcentre (this is not the notion of
centre used by Cartan, but it was used by Bruhat and Tits [37] in a later adaptation
of Cartan’s argument) — the circumcentre of a bounded set is the centre of the
unique smallest ball that contains that set. (See [33, II.2] for a proof that there is
indeed a unique such ball.)
   Since G.x is G-invariant, so is its centre c, and hence G fixes a point of X. If G
is a subgroup of a group Γ that is acting cocompactly on X, say X = Γ.K where
K is compact, then γ.c ∈ K for some γ ∈ Γ and hence G is conjugate in Γ to a
subgroup of the stabilizer of some point of K. If the action of Γ is proper, then the


                                          139
union of such stabilizers is finite and therefore Γ has only finitely many conjugacy
classes of finite subgroups.
   The existence of a circumcentre for bounded sets was the key feature of the
above argument. By quasifying the usual proof of the existence of such centres in
non-positively curved spaces we get:

Lemma 1.32 (quasi-centres) Let X be a δ-hyperbolic geodesic space. Let Y ⊂ X
be a non-empty bounded subspace. Let rY = inf{ρ ≥ 0 | Y ⊂ B(x, ρ), some x ∈
X}. For all ε > 0, the set Cε (Y ) = {x ∈ X | Y ⊆ B(x, rY + ε)} has diameter less
than (4δ + 2ε).

Proof Given x, x0 ∈ Cε (Y ), let m be the midpoint of a geodesic segment [x, x0 ].
For each y ∈ Y we consider a geodesic triangle with vertices x, x0 , y and with
[x, x0 ] as one of the sides. As X is δ-hyperbolic, m is within a distance δ of some
p ∈ [x, y] ∪ [x0 , y]; suppose that p ∈ [x, y]. Then, since d(x, m) = d(x, x0 )/2 and
d(p, x) ≥ d(x, m) − δ, we have d(y, p) = d(y, x) − d(p, x) ≤ d(y, x) + δ − d(x, x0 )/2,
and hence
                                                    1
                           d(y, m) ≤ rY + ε + 2δ − d(x, x0 ).
                                                    2
But d(y, m) ≥ rY for some y ∈ Y , hence ε + 2δ − 12 d(x, x0 ) ≥ 0.                   2

Proof [of Theorem 1.31] Let Γ be a hyperbolic group and consider the natural
action of Γ on its Cayley graph. Let H ⊂ Γ be a finite subgroup, and let C1 (H)
be as in the lemma. C1 (H) contains at least one vertex and the action of H leaves
C1 (H), and hence its vertex set, set-wise invariant. If x is one of the vertices of
C1 (H), then x−1 Hx leaves x−1 C1 (H) invariant. But x−1 C1 (H) is a set of diameter
less than (4δ + 2) containing the identity 1, and it contains x−1 Hx = (x−1 Hx).1.
Thus every finite subgroup of Γ is conjugate to a subset of the ball of radius (4δ +2)
about the identity.                                                                 2

   The proof given above does not appear in the literature but I believe that it is
known to a number of researchers in the field, in particular Brian Bowditch and
Ilya Kapovich. Alternative proofs were given by Ol’shanskii and Bogopolskii and
Gerasimov [21].

Quasiconvexity and abelian subgroups of hyperbolic groups
A subspace C of a geodesic space X is said to be convex if for all x, y ∈ C, each
geodesic joining x to y is contained in C. Following Gromov [68], one can quasify
this notion: a subspace C of a geodesic metric space X is said to be quasiconvex if
there exists a constant k > 0 such that for all x, y ∈ C, some geodesic joining x to
y is contained in the k-neighbourhood of C.

Exercise 1.33 Let G be a group with finite generating set A. Let H ⊂ G be a
subgroup. Prove that if H is a quasiconvex subset of the Cayley graph CA (G) then
H is finitely generated, and H ,→ G is a quasi-isometric embedding (with respect
to any choice of word metrics).

                                         140
   In the circumstances of the above exercise one says that H is a quasiconvex
 subgroup of G. In the light of (1.27) we have:

 Proposition 1.34 The quasiconvex subgroups of hyperbolic groups are hyperbolic.

   The following results are due to Gromov [68]. The ideas underlying them have
 been used by other authors, particularly Hamish Short, to obtain similar results in
 wider contexts (see [59], [63], [4], [107]).

 Proposition 1.35 Let Γ be a hyperbolic group. numdepth ¿3 oodeep
1. The centralizer C(γ) of every γ ∈ Γ is a quasiconvex subgroup.
2. If the subgroups H1 , H2 ⊂ Γ are quasiconvex then so is H1 ∩ H2 .

 Corollary 1.36 Suppose that Γ is hyperbolic and that γ ∈ Γ has infinite order.
 Then: numdepth ¿3 oodeep
1. The map Z → Γ given by n 7→ γ n is a quasi-geodesic.
2. hγi has finite index in C(γ). In particular Γ does not contain Z2 .

 Proof C(γ) is quasiconvex, hence finitely generated and hyperbolic. By intersect-
 ing the centralizers of a generating set for C(γ), we see that the centre Z(C(γ))
 is also finitely generated and hyperbolic. It is easy to see that a finitely gener-
 ated abelian group is hyperbolic if and only if it contains a cyclic subgroup of
 finite index. Hence Z(C(γ)) contains hγi as a subgroup of finite index, and since
 Z(C(γ)) ,→ C(γ) and C(γ) ,→ Γ are quasi-isometric embeddings (1.33), so is
 hγi ,→ Γ. This proves (1).
    Fix a finite generating set with respect to which Γ is δ-hyperbolic. Let d be the as-
 sociated word metric. Define the translation number τ (γ) to be limn→∞ d(1, γ n )/n.
 (This limit exists because the function n 7→ d(1, γ n ) is sub-additive.) It follows from
 (1) that τ (γ) > 0.
    τ (γ r ) = r τ (γ) and τ (x−1 γx) = τ (γ) for all x ∈ Γ. Thus, replacing γ by a
 suitable power if necessary, we may assume that γ is not conjugate to any element
 a distance 4δ or less from the identity. I claim that it follows from this that if
 [γ, g] = 1 then g lies within a distance K := d(1, γ) + 4δ of hγi. For suppose not,
 choose g so that d(g, hγi) = d(g, 1) > K, and consider a geodesic quadrilateral Q
 in the Cayley graph of Γ with vertices {1, γ, g, gγ = γg}. The side of Q joining γ
 to γg is chosen to be the translate by γ of the side joining 1 to g; we write gt to
 denote the point a distance t from 1 on this side.
    δ-hyperbolicity (1.16) implies that gt lies within a distance 2δ of a point on one
 of the other three sides of Q. If d(1, g) − d(1, γ) − 2δ > t > 2δ, then this other
 point must be on the side joining γ to γg; say it is γgt0 . Since t0 = d(γgt0 , hγi), we
 have t0 ≤ t + 2δ. Similarly t ≤ t0 + 2δ, and hence d(gt , γgt ) ≤ 4δ. But this implies
 that d(1, gt−1 γgt ) ≤ 4δ, contrary to our assumption on γ. This proves (2).            2




                                           141
 1.37        Translation numbers are rational
 A remarkable result of Gromov [68], an elegant proof of which has been given by
 Delzant [55], states that associated to each word metric on a hyperbolic group Γ
 there is an integer M such that each translation number τ (γ), γ ∈ Γ (as defined in
 the preceding proof) is a rational number whose denominator divides M .

 1.38        Semihyperbolic groups
 One obvious omission from these lectures is the theory of semihyperbolic groups
 as laid out by myself and Alonso in [4] (following the influence of [68], [59] and
 [63]). In this theory one seeks to encapsulate the global essence of non-positive
 curvature (as opposed to strictly negative curvature) by a suitable analogue of the
 δ-hyperbolic condition. In the theory of semihyperbolic groups quasi-convexity
 again plays a key role.


 Lecture 2: The geometry of spaces
 In this lecture I shall present those elements of the basic theory of CAT(0) spaces
 that are most useful from the point of view of combinatorial and geometric group
 theory. All of this material is taken from my book with André Haefliger [33]. My
 main aim is to illustrate the close connection between the geometry of CAT(0)
 spaces and the structure of the groups which act on them.
    A key feature in this theory is the existence of a local-to-global theorem for non-
 positively curved7 spaces (Theorem 2.2). This is important from the point of view
 of group theory because in many cases it provides a remedy to the problems caused
 by the fact that the rather dull local structure of Cayley graphs precludes any local-
 to-global analysis of their geometry: if one can realise a group Γ as the fundamental
 group of a compact non-positively curved space X, then one can analyze Γ via its
 action by deck-transformations on the universal covering e  X, and we have the option
 of studying Γ laid out as the set of translates of a basepoint in X   e rather than as
 the set of vertices of the Cayley graph. Theorem 2.2 tells us that X    e is a CAT(0)
 space. The action of Γ on X   e is proper, cocompact and by isometries. Thus if by
 a study of CAT(0) spaces we can deduce facts about groups which act on them in
 this manner, then we will have an approach to understanding a (hopefully wide)
 class of groups.
    In order to motivate such a study let me list some of the benefits of getting
 groups to act on CAT(0) spaces.

 Theorem 2.1 (A summary of results) Let Γ be a group that acts properly and
 cocompactly by isometries on a CAT(0) space X. Then: numdepth ¿3 oodeep
1. Γ is finitely presented.
2. Γ satisfies a quadratic isoperimetric inequality (and hence has a solvable word
 problem).
    7
        In all that follows “non-positive curvature” will be meant in the sense of (1.18).


                                                   142
3. Γ has a solvable conjugacy problem.
4. Γ has only finitely many conjugacy classes of finite subgroups.
5. Every solvable subgroup of Γ is virtually abelian.
6. Every abelian subgroup of Γ is finitely generated.
7. If Γ is torsion-free, then it is the fundamental group of a compact cell complex
 whose universal cover is contractible.
8. Γ does not contain subgroups of the form hx, y | x−1 y p x = y q i with |p| 6= |q|.
9. If A ∼
        = Zn is central in Γ then there exists a subgroup of finite index in Γ that
 contains A as a direct factor.

 The class of groups which act properly and cocompactly by isometries on CAT(0)
 spaces is closed under the following operations: numdepth ¿3 oodeep
(a) direct products,
(b) free products with amalgamation along virtually cyclic subgroups.

 All of these results are proved in [33]. I will give a sketch of the proof of parts (1)
 to (9) in the course this lecture and lecture 4. Part (a) is an easy exercise and (b)
 is proved in (3.11).


 Local-to-global
 The following theorem is a variation on a result of M. Gromov [68], following an
 idea of A. D. Alexandrov. A detailed proof was given by W. Ballmann in the
 locally compact case ([64], Chap.10). S. Alexander and R. L. Bishop [1] proved the
 stronger result stated below under the additional hypothesis that Xe is a geodesic
 space. The form of the result stated here is proved in [33, II.4].
    The metric d on a geodesic space X is said to be convex if given any pair of
 geodesic paths c, c0 : [0, 1] → X parametrized proportional to the arc length, the
 following inequality holds for all t ∈ [0, 1]:

                 d(c(t), c0 (t)) ≤ (1 − t) d(c(0), c0 (0)) + t d(c(1), c0 (1)).

 The metric is said to be locally convex if every point has a neighbourhood on which
 the induced metric is convex.

 Theorem 2.2 (Generalized Cartan-Hadamard Theorem) Let X be a com-
 plete connected metric space. numdepth ¿3 oodeep
1. If the metric on X is locally convex, then the induced length metric on the uni-
 versal covering Xe is (globally) convex. (In particular there is a unique geodesic
 segment joining each pair of points in Xe and geodesic segments in Xe vary contin-
 uously with their endpoints.)
2. If X is of curvature ≤ κ, where κ ≤ 0, then X e (with the induced length metric)
 is a CAT(κ) space.

                                             143
                                                                x1
                                                                ...
                                                                     xi
                                                                       xi+1

     O
                                                                        ...

                                                                               xn
                        Figure 2.1: Alexandrov’s Patchwork



    The second part of Theorem 2.2 is deduced from the first by a ‘patchwork’
 process indicated in the following picture. Following Alexandrov [2], one proves a
 gluing lemma: given a geodesic triangle Δ(p, q, r) and a point m on the side [p, r],
 if the triangles Δ(p, m, r) and Δ(q, m, r) both satisfy the CAT(κ) inequality, then
 so does Δ(p, q, r). One applies the gluing lemma repeatedly, first to fill out the
 narrow subtriangles in Figure 2.1, such as Δi = Δ(0, xi , xi+1 ), then to assemble
 the Δi into the given (large) triangle.
    We note three consequences of Theorem 2.2 that are important from the point
 of view of group theory.

 Corollary 2.3 If X is a compact non-positively curved space, then: numdepth ¿3
 oodeep
1. The universal cover of X is contractible.
2. Γ = π1 X has a finite K(Γ, 1).
3. If Y is a compact length space and f : Y → X is a local isometry, then f∗ :
 π1 Y → π1 X is an injection.

    (1) is proved in (2.5). In order to deduce (2) from (1) one has to show that X
 has the homotopy type of a finite simplicial complex — see [33, II.5]. (3) is proved
 in [33, II.4].

 Convexity and its consequences
 One of the most basic properties determining the nature of CAT(0) spaces is the
 convexity of the metric.

 Proposition 2.4 If X is a CAT(0) space, then the metric on X is convex (in the
 sense defined above).

                                         144
 Proof First assume that we are given geodesics c, c0 : [0, 1] → X with c(0) =
 c0 (0). Consider a comparison triangle Δ ⊂ E2 for Δ(c(0), c(1), c0 (1)). Given t ∈
 [0, 1], elementary Euclidean geometry tells us that d(c(t), c0 (t)) = t d(c(1), c0 (1)) =
 t d(c(1), c0 (1)). And by the CAT(0) inequality, d(c(t), c0 (t)) ≤ d(c(t), c0 (t)). Hence
 we obtain d(c(t), c0 (t)) ≤ t d(c(1), c0 (1)).
     In the general case, we introduce the linearly reparametrized geodesic c00 :
 [0, 1] → X with c00 (0) = c(0) and c00 (1) = c0 (1). By applying the preceding special
 case, first to c and c00 and then to c0 and c00 with reversed orientation, we obtain:
 d(c(t), c00 (t)) ≤ t d(c(1), c00 (1)) and d(c00 (t), c0 (t)) ≤ (1 − t) d(c00 (0), c0 (0)). Hence,

 d(c(t), c0 (t)) ≤ d(c(t), c00 (t)) + d(c00 (t), c0 (t)) ≤ t d(c(1), c0 (1)) + (1 − t) d(c(0), c0 (0)),

 as required.                                                                                       2

 Remark 2.5 Let X be a CAT(0) space, fix x0 ∈ X and define a homotopy H :
 X × [0, 1] → X by H(x, t) = cx (t), where cx : [0, 1] → X is a constant-speed
 parametrization of the geodesic connecting x0 to x. It follows from the above propo-
 sition that H is a continuous map. Thus X is contractible.

    I shall not include many proofs in this lecture (all relevant proofs can be found
 in Part II of [33]). The above proof is given so as to illustrate the nature of ele-
 mentary arguments using comparison triangles. One of the hallmarks of the theory
 of CAT(0) spaces is that by concatenating many such elementary arguments one
 arrives at non-trivial results remarkably quickly. This remark applies in particular
 to the following results.
    Recall that a subset C of a CAT(0) spaces X is said to be convex if the geodesic
 in X joining each pair of points x, y ∈ C lies entirely in C.

 Proposition 2.6 Let X be a complete space. numdepth ¿3 oodeep
1. If C ⊆ X is closed and convex, then for every x ∈ X there exists a unique point
 π(x) ∈ C such that d(x, π(x)) = d(x, C) := inf y∈C d(x, y). Moreover the map π
 does not increase distances.
2. Every bounded subset of X has a unique circumcentre.

    Following the discussion in (1.31), from 2.6(2) we deduce:

 Corollary 2.7 numdepth ¿3 oodeep
1. If a group Γ acts by isometries on a complete CAT(0) space X, then every finite
 subgroup of Γ fixes a point of X.
2. If the action of Γ is proper and cocompact, then Γ contains only finitely many
 conjugacy classes of finite subgroups.
3. If Y is a compact non-positively curved space, then π1 Y is torsion-free.

 The action of the fundamental group of any space on the universal cover is free, so
 part (3) of the above corollary follows from part (2) and Theorem 2.2.

                                                 145
                     r                                                     r'

               x                      d(x,y)                         x'



                      y

                                          q           p'                              q'
    p                                                                       y'
                             "If d(x,y)   d(x',y'), everything expands."


                Figure 2.2: The idea behind the Flat triangle lemma



Flat subspaces of CAT(0) spaces
The two most classical examples of CAT(0) spaces are Euclidean space En and
hyperbolic space Hn . As every undergraduate knows, the flavours of the geom-
etry enjoyed by these two spaces are quite distinct. Given an arbitrary CAT(0)
space, then, one might wonder whether it is essentially hyperbolic in nature, or
more Euclidean. More precisely, one might ask whether it contains significant flat
(Euclidean) subspaces, and if it does not then can one make precise the idea that it
is morally speaking negatively curved? We shall see that in the case of cocompact
CAT(0) spaces such a dichotomy does indeed exist (2.10).
   Our search begins with a remarkable observation of Alexandrov: given a geodesic
triangle Δ in a CAT(0) space X, compare Δ with its comparison triangle Δ ⊂ E2
as in (1.18); if there is any non-trivial equality d(x, y) = d(x, y), then one can fill
Δ to get an isometrically embedded triangular Euclidean disc in X.
   To state this more precisely, we define the convex hull of a subset A of a geodesic
space X to be the intersection of all of the convex subspaces of X containing A.
(Despite what our Euclidean intuition may suggest, the convex hull of a geodesic
triangle in a CAT(0) space may not be 2-dimensional. For example, in the complex
hyperbolic plane CH2 the convex hull of three points in general position is 4-
dimensional — see [33, II.10].)

Proposition 2.8 (Flat triangle lemma) Let Δ(p, q, r) be a geodesic triangle in
a CAT(0) space, and let Δ(p, q, r) ⊂ E2 be its comparison triangle. If there exist
points x in the interior of [p, r] and y ∈ [p, q] with y 6= p such that d(x, y) = d(x, y),
then the triangle Δ(p, q, r) is flat; more precisely, the convex hull of Δ in X is
isometric to the convex hull of Δ in E2 .

  A geodesic line in a metric space X is, by definition, a map c : R → X such that
d(c(t), c(t0 )) = |t − t0 | for all t, t0 ∈ R. Two geodesic lines c, c0 in X are said to be
asymptotic if there exists a constant K such that d(c(t), c0 (t)) ≤ K for all t ∈ R.
We remind the reader that if a function R → R is convex and bounded, then it is
constant.

Theorem 2.9 (The flat strip theorem) Let X be a CAT(0) space, and let c :

                                               146
 R → X and c0 : R → X be geodesic lines in X. If c and c0 are asymptotic, then the
 convex hull of c(R) ∪ c0 (R) is isometric to a flat strip R × [0, D] ⊂ E2 .

 Proof [33] Let π be the projection of X to the closed convex subspace c(R). By
 reparametrizing if necessary, we may assume that c(0) = π(c0 (0)).
    The function t 7→ d(c(t), c0 (t)) is convex, non-negative and bounded, hence con-
 stant, equal to D say. Similarly, for all a ∈ R, the function t 7→ d(c(t + a), c0 (t)) is
 constant. In particular d(c(a + t), c0 (t)) = d(c(a), c0 (0)) ≥ d(c(0), c0 (0)), and hence
 π(c0 (t)) = c(t) for all t.
    Given t < t0 , we consider the quadrilateral in X which is the union of the geodesic
 segments [c(t), c(t0 )], [c(t0 ), c0 (t0 )], [c0 (t0 ), c0 (t)] and [c0 (t), c(t)]. We divide this into
 two geodesic triangles by introducing the diagonal [c(t), c0 (t0 )]. Let tm = (t + t0 )/2.
 By the triangle inequality, d(c(tm ), c0 (tm )) ≤ d(c(tm ), m) + d(m, c0 (tm )), where m
 is the midpoint of [c(t), c0 (t0 )]. And by hypothesis, d(c(tm ), c0 (tm )) = D.
    Consider the parallelogram in the Euclidean plane obtained by joining compari-
 son triangles Δ(c(t), c0 (t0 ), c0 (t)) and Δ(c(t), c0 (t0 ), c(t0 )) along the side [c(t), c0 (t0 )].
 We have d(c(tm ), c0 (t0m )) = d(c(tm ), m) + d(m, c0 (t0m )) = D. But by the CAT(0)
 inequality, d(c(tm ), m) ≥ d(c(tm ), m) and d(m, c0 (t0m )) ≥ d(m, c0 (t0m )). Thus we
 must have equality throughout, and by the flat triangle lemma, the convex hull of
 {c(t), c0 (t), c(t0 ), c0 (t0 )} is isometric to a Euclidean rectangle.
    Sending t → −∞ and t0 → ∞, it follows that the map R × [0, D] → X which
 sends (t, s) to the point a distance s from c(t) on the geodesic segment [c(t), c0 (t)]
 is an isometry onto the convex hull of c(R) ∪ c0 (R).                                                2

    By means of a (somewhat subtle) limiting and compactness argument based on
 the Flat triangle lemma, one can prove the following result. This result was proved
 in the setting of smooth manifolds by Eberlein [57]. Gromov pointed out that
 it should work in arbitrary CAT(0) spaces and I provided a proof of Gromov’s
 suggestion [27]. Bowditch [24] provided an alternative proof that works in even
 greater generality.

 Theorem 2.10 (Flat plane theorem) Let X be a proper CAT(0) space that ad-
 mits a cocompact action by a group of isometries. Then X is δ-hyperbolic for some
 δ > 0 if and only if it does not contain a subspace isometric to the Euclidean plane.

 Product decompositions and isometries
 In view of the Flat strip theorem, the terms parallel and asymptotic are synonymous
 when applied to geodesic lines in a CAT(0) space. From the Flat strip theorem we
 deduce:

 Theorem 2.11 (A product decomposition theorem) Let X be a CAT(0)
 space and let c : R → X be a geodesic line. numdepth ¿3 oodeep
1. The union of the images of all geodesic lines c0 : R → X parallel to c is a convex
 subspace Xc of X.



                                                  147
2. Let p be the restriction to Xc of the projection on the complete convex subspace
 c(R). Let Xc0 = p−1 (c(0)). Then, Xc0 is convex (in particular it is a CAT(0) space)
 and Xc is canonically isometric to the product Xc0 × R.

 Proof [33] Given two points x1 , x2 ∈ Xc we fix geodesic lines c1 and c2 parallel to
 c, such that x1 lies in the image of c1 and x2 lies in the image of c2 . Because c1 is
 parallel to c2 , we can apply the Flat strip theorem and deduce that the convex hull
 of c1 (R) ∪ c2 (R) is isometric to a flat strip; in particular it is the union of images
 of geodesic lines parallel to c. This proves that Xc is convex.
    Given x ∈ Xc , let cx be the unique geodesic line in Xc with p(cx (0)) = c(0).
    Let j : Xc0 × R → Xc be the bijection defined by j(x, t) = cx (t). Using the
 Flat strip theorem, it is clear that this map is an isometry provided d(x, x0 ) =
 d(cx (R), cx0 (R)) for all x, x0 ∈ Xc0 . To complete the proof one has to check that,
 given three geodesic lines ci : R → X, i = 1, 2, 3, if the union of each pair of
 these lines is isometric to the union of two parallel lines in E2 , and if pi,j is the
 map that assigns to each point of cj (R) the unique closest point on ci (R), then
 p1,3 ◦ p3,2 ◦ p2,1 = p1,1 , the identity of c1 (R). (See [33, II.2.15].)              2

   The above splitting forms the basis of a number of important results concerning
 the structure of groups which act by isometries on CAT(0) spaces.

 Definition 2.12 Given an isometry γ of a metric space X, the translation length
 of γ is defined to be |γ| := inf{d(x, γ.x) | x ∈ X}. We also define M in(γ) := {x ∈
 X | d(x, γ.x) = |γ|}. If M in(γ) 6= ∅, then γ is called semisimple. If |γ| > 0 and
 M in(γ) 6= ∅, then γ is called a hyperbolic isometry.

 Proposition 2.13 If a group Γ acts properly and cocompactly by isometries on a
 CAT(0) space X, then every element γ ∈ Γ of infinite order acts as a hyperbolic
 isometry. If γ is a hyperbolic isometry of X then: numdepth ¿3 oodeep
1. M in(γ) is closed and convex.
2. M in(γ) is a union of parallel geodesic lines each of which is γ-invariant. (These
 lines are called axes for γ.)
3. M in(γ) is isometric to a product Y × R, and the restriction of γ to M in(γ) is of
 the form (y, t) 7→ (y, t + |γ|), where y ∈ Y, t ∈ R.
4. Every isometry α which commutes with γ leaves M in(γ) = Y × R invariant, and
 its restriction to Y × R is of the form (α0 , α00 ), where α0 is an isometry of Y and
 α00 is a translation of R.

 Exercise 2.14 Prove Theorem 2.1(8).

    The following result places severe restrictions on the way in which central exten-
 sions can act by isometries on CAT(0) spaces. Notice that the conditions on the
 action are very weak here — in particular no discreteness is assumed.




                                           148
Theorem 2.15 Let X be a CAT(0) space and let Γ be a finitely generated group
acting by isometries on X. If Γ contains a central subgroup A ∼   = Zn that acts
faithfully by hyperbolic isometries (apart from the identity element), then there
exists a subgroup of finite index H ⊂ Γ which contains A as a direct factor.

Proof [33] Fix α ∈ A. According to 2.13(4), the action of Γ leaves M in(α) = Y ×R
invariant, and the restriction of each γ ∈ Γ to Y × R is of the form (γ 0 , γ 00 ), where
γ 0 is an isometry of Y and γ 00 is a translation of R. The map γ 7→ γ 00 defines a
homomorphism from Γ to a finitely generated group of translations of R. Such
a group of translations is isomorphic to Zm , for some m, so we have a surjective
homomorphism ψ : Γ → Zm . The image under ψ of A is non-trivial, because it
contains α.
    We compose ψ with the projection of Zm onto a suitable direct summand so
as to obtain a homomorphism φ : Γ → Z such that φ(A) is non-trivial. We then
choose a ∈ A so that φ(a) generates φ(A). Let H0 = φ−1 (φ(A)) and note that H0
has finite index in Γ. The map φ(a) 7→ a splits φ|H0 , giving H0 = ker φ × hai (since
a is central) and A = A0 × hai, where A0 = A ∩ ker φ. By induction on m (the
rank of A) we may assume that A0 is a direct factor of a subgroup of finite index
H 0 ⊂ ker φ. Let H = H 0 × hai.                                                        2

   To give a taste of how one might use a result such as this, let me mention
two applications. The first shows that (2.15) obstructs a suggested approach to
the construction of faithful linear representations of mapping class groups. An
unpublished result of Geoff Mess (see [33, II.7]) shows that centralizers in the
mapping class group M of closed surfaces of genus at least three are not virtually
direct products. Thus (2.15) restricts the ways in which M can act on CAT(0)
spaces (cf. [78]).
   Recall that a Coxeter group (“generalized reflection group”) is a group of the
form hs1 , . . . , sn | s2i = (si sj )mij = 1, i, j = 1, . . . , ni. Gabor Moussong [89] shows
that every Coxeter group acts properly and cocompactly by isometries on a CAT(0)
space, thus:

Corollary 2.16 The mapping class groups of closed surfaces of genus at least three
do not admit faithful representations into Coxeter groups.

  Combining Corollary 2.16 with some standard (but non-trivial) results in 3-
manifold topology, in [33, II.7] we prove:

Theorem 2.17 If a closed 3-manifold M admits a metric that has non-positive
curvature (in the sense of Alexandrov), and if the centre of π1 M is non-trivial,
                                     c = Σ × S 1 , where Σ is a closed surface.
then M has a finite-sheeted covering M

Flat torus theorem
We have seen (Flat plane theorem) that the existence of flat planes is the only ob-
struction that can prevent a cocompact CAT(0) space from being hyperbolic. But


                                             149
 how might such planes arise? Here we find another beautiful connection between
 geometry and group theory, first discovered in the setting of smooth manifolds by
 Gromoll-Wolf [66] and Lawson-Yau [79].

 Theorem 2.18 (Flat torus theorem) Let A be a free abelian group of rank n
 acting properly by semi-simple isometries on a CAT(0) space X. Then: numdepth
 ¿3 oodeep
              T
1. M in(A) = α∈A M in(α) is non-empty and splits as a product Y × En .
2. Every element α ∈ A leaves M in(A) invariant and respects the product decom-
 position; α acts as the identity on the first factor Y and as a translation on the
 second factor En .
3. The quotient of each n-flat {y} × En by the action of A is an n-torus.
4. If an isometry of X normalizes A, then it leaves M in(A) invariant and preserves
 the product decomposition.
5. If a subgroup Γ ⊂ Isom(X) normalizes A, then a subgroup of finite index in Γ
 centralizes A. Moreover, if Γ is finitely generated, then Γ has a subgroup of finite
 index that contains A as a direct factor.

    The proof proceeds by induction on the rank of A; the base step is contain in
 (2.13). In the inductive step one looks at the action of A on M in(a1 ) where a1 is
 a primitive element of A. See [33, II.7] for a complete proof, generalizations, and
 proofs of the following consequences.

 Corollary 2.19 If Γ is the fundamental group of a compact geodesic space of non-
 positive curvature, then numdepth ¿3 oodeep
1. every abelian subgroup of Γ is finitely generated,
2. virtually abelian subgroups of Γ satisfy the ascending chain condition,
3. every solvable subgroup of Γ is virtually abelian.

    The ideas used to prove the Product Decomposition Theorem and the Flat torus
 theorem can also be used to prove the following theorem, which was first proved
 for smooth manifolds in [66] and [79]. In the setting of CAT(0) spaces this result
 is due to Claire Baribaud [11]. A more general result is proved in [33, II.6.22].

 Theorem 2.20 (Splitting theorem) Let Y be a compact geodesic space of non-
 positive curvature in which every local geodesic can be extended to a locally isomet-
 ric embedding of the real line. If the fundamental group of Y splits as a product
 Γ = Γ1 × Γ2 and Γ has trivial centre, then Y splits as a product Y = Y1 × Y2 ,
 isometrically, where π1 Yi = Γi for i = 1, 2.




                                          150
A fundamental dichotomy in group theory?
Let me end this lecture by returning, in the light of the Flat torus theorem, to the
dichotomy exposed by the Flat plane theorem.

Question 2.21 Suppose that Γ is the fundamental group of a compact non-posit-
ively curved space. If Γ is not hyperbolic, must it contain a free abelian subgroup
of rank two ?

   I suspect that the answer to this question is no, but in restricted settings the
answer is yes: Bangert and Schroeder [10] proved that the answer is yes for real-
analytic manifolds; Lee Mosher and I [34] proved the same for closed topological
3-manifolds (following earlier work of Mosher [88], Schroeder [101] and Buyalo
[41]); and the answer is also yes in the case where Γ is a cocompact lattice in a
semi-simple Lie group [83].
   An intriguing possibility is that the dichotomy suggested in (2.21) may have
little to do with non-positive curvature, per se, but instead it might be a special
case of a much more general phenomenon.

Question 2.22 Let Γ be a finitely presented group. Suppose that Γ admits an
Eilenberg-Maclane space K(Γ, 1) that has only finitely many cells in each dimen-
sion (equivalently, suppose that the cohomology of Γ is finitely generated in each
dimension). If Γ is not hyperbolic, must it contain a subgroup of the form hx, y |
y −1 xp y = y q i ?

   Question 2.21 is a special case of Question 2.22. Another interesting special case
of Question 2.22 is where Γ is a subgroup of a hyperbolic group.
   The dichotomy suggested in Theorem 2.2 does not hold for finitely presented
groups in general. Thus far two types of counterexamples are known: Noel Brady
[25] showed that there exist hyperbolic groups G and finitely presented subgroups
H ⊂ G that are not hyperbolic (cf. (1.36)), and Slava Grigorchuk [65] has con-
structed finitely presented HNN extensions of the form H = B∗φ where B is an
infinite, finitely generated, torsion group and φ : B → B is an epimorphism.
   In each of these examples, the third homology group of H is not finitely generated
and therefore H does not have an Eilenberg-Maclane complex K(H, 1) with finitely
many 3-cells.


Lecture 3: Building CAT(0) spaces of interest in group
theory
In Lecture 1 we saw how the basic decision problems of combinatorial group theory
lead to the study of non-positive curvature. Lecture 2 was about the basic struc-
ture of CAT(0) spaces with emphasis on the close connections between geometry,
topology and group theory in the presence of non-positive curvature. The purpose
of Lecture 3 is to put some meat on the attractive theoretical skeleton that has
emerged: I shall explain various examples and general methods for constructing

                                        151
CAT(0) spaces, and I shall try to illustrate how such constructions can give rise to
interesting new groups and new insights into well-known groups. Let me begin by
mentioning one result of the latter kind.

Theorem 3.1 Every Coxeter group has a solvable conjugacy problem.

   Surprisingly, no algebraic proof of this result is known. The only known proof
relies on the theorem of Moussong that I mentioned earlier: every finitely generated
Coxeter group W acts properly and cocompactly by isometries on a p̧iecewise-
Euclidean complex. In (4.5) I shall explain why groups which act in this way have
a solvable conjugacy problem.

Example 3.2 (1) A simply-connected, complete, Riemannian manifold is a
CAT(0) space if and only if all of its sectional curvatures are non-positive (see [48],
[33, II.1A]). Examples include En , Hn , and any symmetric space of non-compact
type.
   (2) Metric graphs. A metric graph (1-complex) X consists of a set of vertices
and a set of edges joining them; each edge is given a metric that makes it locally
isometric to a closed interval of the real line; a (pseudo)metric is defined on X
by setting the distance between two points equal to the length of the shortest path
between them, where length is measured in the given (local) metrics on the edges.
   I encourage you to consider the many pathologies that can arise if one does not
impose any restrictions on the lengths of the edges (particularly if there are vertices
of infinite valence) cf. [33, I.1.9]. I also encourage you to check that if there are
only finitely many different edge lengths then the metric defined above makes X a
complete geodesic space of non-positive curvature.
   Truncated hyperbolic space. Given a geodesic space X with metric d and an arc-
connected subspace Y ⊂ X, there are two metrics with which one might endow Y :
one might simply define the distance between y, y 0 ∈ Y to be d(y, y 0 ), or one might
define the distance to be the infimum of the lengths of paths that join y to y 0 in Y
(where length is measured using d). The second construction is called the induced
path metric on Y . In order to see the difference between these metrics, consider
the case where Y is the unit circle in the Euclidean plane.
   If one removes a disjoint collection of open horoballs from real hyperbolic space
H then the induced path metric is a CAT(0) space. This is proved in [33, II.11].
  n

It follows that non-uniform lattices in SO(n, 1) act properly and cocompactly by
isometries on CAT(0) spaces (namely these truncated hyperbolic spaces). The pres-
ence of nilpotent subgroups that are not virtually abelian show that non-uniform
lattices in other rank 1 Lie groups do not admit such actions (by 2.1(5)) and hence
the corresponding truncated symmetric spaces are not non-positively curved.

Polyhedral complexes
The simplest examples of geodesic metric spaces that are not manifolds are provided
by metric graphs. A wider and much more interesting class of spaces is provided by
the higher dimensional analogues of graphs, metric polyhedral complexes. Roughly


                                         152
 speaking, to construct a piecewise-Euclidean complex K one takes the disjoint
 union of a family of convex polyhedra from Euclidean space En and one identifies
 them along isometric faces. As with graphs, a (pseudo)metric on K is defined
 by setting the distance between each pair of points equal to the length of paths
 joining them, where length is measured in the given metrics on the individual cells.
 In my thesis [26] I proved that if the set of isometry types of the cells, denoted
 Shapes(K), is finite, then every pair of points in K can be joined by a shortest
 path, in other words K is a geodesic space.
    An entirely analogous construction gives piecewise hyperbolic complexes (ob-
 tained by identifying faces among a disjoint union of convex polyhedra from hy-
 perbolic space Hn ), or piecewise spherical complexes (obtained by identifying faces
 among a disjoint union of convex polyhedra from the n-sphere Sn ). More generally,
 one can take convex polyhedra from any simply-connected manifold of constant sec-
 tional curvature, and this gives the general notion of a metric polyhedral complex
 (see [33, I.7]).
    There are various ways of characterizing complexes whose curvature is bounded
 above (see [33, II.5]); we mention two of them.

 Theorem 3.3 Let K be a piecewise Euclidean or piecewise hyperbolic complex with
 Shapes(K) finite. The following conditions are equivalent. numdepth ¿3 oodeep
1. K is non-positively curved.
2. Every x ∈ K has a neighbourhood in which there is a unique geodesic joining each
 pair of points.
3. K satisfies the link condition.

    The link condition can be described as follows. First think of a vertex v of a
 convex polyhedron P (e.g. a solid cube) in Euclidean space of some dimension and
 imagine how a small (radius ε) sphere centred at v intersects P . The intersection is
 a small spherical polyhedron (a spherical triangle if P is a cube). Now rescale your
 mental picture so that this spherical polyhedron is based on a sphere of radius one
 rather than radius ε. It is then called the link of v in P .
    If K is as in Theorem 3.3, then the link of a vertex v ∈ K, denoted Lk(v), is
 obtained by taking the link of v in each of the individual cells incident at v and
 assembling them according to the way in which the cells intersect. Thus Lk(v) is
 a piecewise spherical complex. It is the analogue in metric complexes of the unit
 tangent space in differential geometry: the points of Lk(v) are the directions of
 geodesics issuing from v, and the distance between each pairs of points should be
 thought of as the angle at v between the geodesics issuing in these directions. One
 says that K satisfies the link condition if for all vertices v ∈ K and all x, y ∈ Lk(v),
 if d(x, y) < π then there is a unique geodesic joining x to y in Lk(v).


 2-dimensional complexes
 I shall describe a number of constructions of non-positively curved 2-dimensional
 complexes; further constructions are given in [33, II.5]. It is more difficult to con-

                                           153
               BAD                                                       GOOD


                                                   v2                                     v3



                     v1
                                                     /2             /2                    /2        /2
      Lk(v1)                              Lk(v2)                                Lk(v3)
                          /2
                                                          /2   /2
                                                                                         /2          /2
                                                     /2             /2
                                                                                               /2



                                      Figure 3.1: Lk(v)



struct examples in higher dimensions, but examples do exist, for instance Bruhat-
Tits buildings of affine type (see [37] and [36]). One of the advantages of working
with 2-dimensional complexes8 is that it is easy to check the link condition.

Example 3.4 (The link condition for 2-complexes) Let K be a piecewise
Euclidean or piecewise hyperbolic 2-complex and let v ∈ K be a vertex. Then
Lk(v), as defined above, is a metric graph and K is non-positively curved if and
only if there does not exist a vertex such that Lk(v) contains an embedded circuit
of length strictly less than 2π.

  Figure 3.1 should be compared with Figure 1.1.

Squared 2-complexes
Squared 2-complexes are, by definition, piecewise Euclidean 2-complexes in which
all of the 2-cells are squares of side length 1. In this simple setting the link condition
reduces to the statement that the link of each vertex contains no embedded circuits
of combinatorial length less than four.

Exercise Check that you thoroughly understand the following assertion: the prod-
uct of any two metric graphs with edge lengths 1 is a squared 2-complex of non-
positive curvature. (The links of vertices in this case are complete bipartite graphs.)

  In what follows we shall use the term tree to mean a simply connected metric
graph all of whose edges have length 1.

Theorem 3.5 Let K be a compact, connected, non-positively curved squared com-
plex. If the link of each vertex in K is isomorphic to a complete bi-partite graph,
then the universal cover of K is the product of two trees.

   This result seems to have been discovered independently by a number of authors
[115], [7], [39]. A detailed proof can be found in [35].
  8
      hereafter abbreviated to “2-complexes”


                                               154
   This theorem relates the study of squared 2-complexes to the study of the auto-
morphism groups of products of trees. This brings us into a very rich world, because
trees are combinatorial analogues of symmetric spaces of non-compact type, and in
keeping with this analogy one finds that many of the groups which act on products
of trees enjoy remarkable geometric and arithmetic properties. The most striking
result in this direction is the following construction due to Marc Burger and Shahar
Mozes [39].

Theorem 3.6 (Burger-Mozes) There exist finitely presented simple groups that
act freely and cocompactly by isometries on a product of two trees. Moreover, one
can construct such groups by amalgamating two finitely generated free groups along
subgroups of finite index.

   But the number of generators and relations is rather large. Prior to the work
of Burger and Mozes, my student Dani Wise had (by hand) produced many inter-
esting examples of non-positively curved squared complexes including some whose
fundamental groups have no non-trivial finite quotients [115].
   Notice that by (1.13) any group Γ which acts properly and cocompactly on a
product of trees in quasi-isometric to a product of finitely generated free groups,
but (3.6) shows that Γ may have utterly different residual properties to products
of free groups.
   Ian Acheson and Dani Wise [115] (independently) noticed that work of Wein-
baum [114], originally phrased in the language of small cancellation theory, essen-
tially proves the following result.

Theorem 3.7 The fundamental group of the complement of every tame, prime,
alternating link in S3 is the fundamental group of a compact non-positively curved
squared complex.

Remark It follows from (3.12) that one can remove the hypothesis that the link
is prime at the expense of replacing the conclusion “squared” by “polyhedral”.
The complex in (3.7) has two vertices, one edge for each region in the plane of
projection and one square for each crossing. The idea of the construction is this:
one regards the alternating projection as lying on a plane in R3 and one places one
vertex a above the plane and one b below it. For each complementary region xi of
the projection one introduces an edge labelled xi oriented from a to b. Then for
each crossing in the projection of the link one attaches a square (2-cell) by gluing
the boundary circuit to the path that traces out the edges xi1 , x∗i2 , xi3 , x∗i4 in order,
where the asterisk denotes reversed orientation and the regions xi1 , xi2 , xi3 , xi4 are
those that provide the corners at the crossing; they are read from above the plane
in clockwise order and the strand of the link that is between xi1 and xi2 passes
over the other strand. The natural presentation of the fundamental group of this
complex is essentially Dehn’s presentation of the link group [81]. (See [115] or [33,
II.7] for details.)




                                            155
Exercise The Hopf link consists of two circles that cannot be separated in 3-
dimensional space and are such that the link has a projection with only two cross-
ings. Show that the complex that the above construction ascribes to this link is a
torus, but that this torus is not a metric product.

   In [35] the geometry of non-positively curved squared complexes is used to in-
vestigate subgroups of the direct product of two free groups. In particular we give
a geometric explanation of the following theorem of Baumslag and Roseblade [15].

Theorem 3.8 ([15]) If F1 and F2 are free groups and H is a finitely presented
subgroup of F1 × F2 , then either H is free or else it contains a subgroup of finite
index H1 × H2 , where H1 ⊂ F1 and H2 ⊂ F2 .

The modified Rips construction
The following algorithmic construction gives rise to a host of interesting examples
of non-positively curved complexes and allows one to translate the pathologies of
arbitrary group presentations into pairs of groups N ⊂ Γ, where Γ is hyperbolic
and N is finitely generated. In Lecture 4 I shall explain how one can exploit
this transfer of pathology to expose the diverse nature of decision problems for
subgroups of groups which act properly and cocompactly on CAT(0) spaces.

Theorem 3.9 There is an algorithm that associates to every finite presentation a
short exact sequence
                          1 → N → Γ → G → 1,
where G is the group given by the presentation, N is a finitely generated group and
Γ is the fundamental group of a compact, negatively curved, piecewise hyperbolic
2-complex K. Moreover one can remetrize K as a piecewise Euclidean squared
complex of non-positive curvature.

   This construction is based closely on an idea of E. Rips. In [99] he proved a
version of this theorem in which instead of forcing Γ to be a fundamental group of
the above type, he arranged for it to satisfy an arbitrarily strict small cancellation
condition. The details of the adaptation given above were worked out by Wise in
[116] and a slightly different account is given in [33, II.5].
   In outline, Rips’s idea is that given G = hX | Ri, one should introduce new
generators a = {a1 , . . . , an }, “unwrap” the old relations, and add a new set of
relations U to make the subgroup generated by a normal. To “unwrap” r ∈ R we
replace r = 1 by a relation of the form r = wr (a); let R̃ denote the set of these new
relations. To construct U , for each x ∈ X and ai ∈ a we choose words ui,x and u0i,x
and define x−1 ai x = ui,x (a) and xai x−1 = u0i,x (a). The key to the construction is
that the words wr , ui,x and u0i,x must be long enough and sufficiently independent
to ensure that
                                     Γ := hX , a | R̃, U i
satisfies a small cancellation condition. (See [81] for background on small cancel-
lation theory.)

                                         156
   In Rips’s original construction one only needs two new generators, but in (3.9)
one needs more in order to promote the small cancellation condition to the (more
restrictive) link condition for an associated polyhedral complex.
Example 3.10 (Non-hopfian groups) Following earlier work of Baumslag and
Solitar [16] and Meier [85], in [116] Dani Wise considered the following groups:
                                                             n −1
           T (n) = ha, b, ta , tb | [a, b] = 1, t−1                          n
                                                 a ata = (ab) , tb btb = (ab) i.

If n ≥ 2, certain non-trivial commutators, for example g0 = [ta (ab)t−1a , b], lie in the
kernel of the epimorphism T (n)  T (n) given by a 7→ an , b 7→ bn , ta 7→ ta , tb 7→ tb .
Groups which admit such self-surjections with kernel are called non-Hopfian.
   T (n) is the fundamental group of the non-positively curved 2-complex X(n) that
one constructs as follows: take the (skew) torus formed by identifying opposite sides
of a rhombus with sides of length n and small diagonal of length 1; the loops formed
by the images of the sides of the rhombus are labelled a and b respectively; to this
torus attach two tubes S × [0, 1], where S is a circle of length n; one end of the first
tube is attached to the loop labelled a and one end of the second tube is attached to
the loop labelled b; in each case the other end of the tube wraps n times around the
image of the small diagonal of the rhombus. One checks easily that this complex
satisfies the link condition.


New spaces from old
A natural way to construct interesting new metric spaces is to take a disjoint col-
lection of known metric spaces and glue them together along subspaces. Intuitively
speaking, this means that we glue the spaces by means of an equivalence rela-
tion and then define the distance between points in the resulting space by taking
the infimum of the lengths (measured in the original metrics) of paths joining the
points, as we did in the construction of polyhedral spaces. In order to make this
description precise we need two technical devices. First, given two metric spaces
                                                                             `
X1 , X2 , we extend the given metrics to a metric on their disjoint union X1 X2
by defining d(x, y) = ∞ if x ∈ X1 and y ∈ X2 . Secondly, given a metric space
X and an equivalence relation ∼ on X, the quotient pseudometric d on the set of
equivalence classes X/∼ is given by the formula:
                                               n
                                               X
                               d(x, y) = inf         d(xi , yi ),
                                               i=1

where the infimum is taken over all sequences C = (x1 , y1 , x2 , y2 , . . . , xn , yn ) of
points of X such that x1 ∈ x, yn ∈ y, and yi ∼ xi+1 for i = 1, . . . , n − 1. (d may
fail to be a metric because the distance between distinct classes x and y is zero.)
Theorem 3.11 ([33, II.11]) Let X and A be metric spaces of non-positive curva-
ture and`suppose that A is compact. Let φ1 , φ2 : A → X be local isometries and let
X = X (A × [0, 1])/∼, where ∼ is generated by (a, 0) ∼ φ1 (a) and (a, 1) ∼ φ2 (a).
Then the quotient pseudometric on X is actually a metric and X is non-positively
curved.

                                           157
                                    c1                c2




                       X1
                       1     G1                              1   X2   G2



                           Figure 3.2: Proof of Corollary 3.12



  We give one application to indicate how this result can be used to mimic group
theoretic constructions in the world of non-positive curvature.

Corollary 3.12 If G1 and G2 act properly and cocompactly by isometries on some
CAT(0) space, then so too does any amalgamated free product of the form G1 ∗C G2 ,
where C contains a cyclic subgroup of finite index.

Proof We sketch the proof in the torsion-free case with C = Z; see [33, II.11] for
the general case. For i = 1, 2 let Xi be a compact non-positively curved space with
π1 Xi = Gi . The idea of the proof is shown in Figure 3.2.
   The generators of the cyclic subgroups identified by the amalgamated free prod-
uct can be represented by closed geodesics (i.e. locally isometric embeddings of
circles), c1 : S1 → X1 and c2 : S2 → X2 . By scaling the metric on X1 , we may
assume that these
                ` geodesics have the same length. Then we can apply the theorem
with X = X1 X2 and A = S1 = S2 and φi = ci for i = 1, 2. The Seifert - van
Kampen theorem implies that π1 X is the given amalgamated free product G1 ∗Z G2 .
                                                                                  2

   Corollary 3.12 does not extend (without further hypotheses) to amalgamated
free products along finitely generated free groups (or free abelian) groups of higher
rank. The question of when these more general amalgamations do act nicely on
CAT(0) spaces is discussed at some length in [33, III]. Note too that in the light of
2.1(8), we know that Z∗Z = hx, t | t−1 xt = x2 i provides a counterexample to the
most naive HNN analogue of (3.12).

An embedding theorem
The following is one a number of embedding theorems of a similar ilk proved in
[31].

Theorem 3.13 Every compact, connected, non-positively curved space X admits
an isometric embedding into a compact, connected, non-positively curved space X
such that X has no non-trivial finite-sheeted coverings (equivalently π1 X has no
non-trivial finite quotients). If X is a polyhedral complex of dimension n ≥ 2, then
one can arrange for X to be a complex of the same dimension.



                                          158
                                              A



                                    K                   M
                                              E


                          B                   L                   C
                            Figure 3.3: A triangle of groups



   Given an arbitrary group Γ0 with finite generating set {a1 , . . . , an }, in order
to embed Γ0 in a group with no non-trivial finite quotients one can proceed as
follows. First, to reduce to the case where the ai have infinite order, replace Γ0 by
Γ = Γ0 ∗ hti and {a1 , . . . , an } by {t, ta1 , . . . , tan }. Let G be a torsion-free group
(such as that in (3.6)) that has no finite quotients. Form Γ ∗Z G by identifying
a1 with an element of infinite order in G, then identify the resulting group with
another copy of G, this time identifying a2 with an element of infinite order in
this second copy of G. Repeat a total of n times. In the group that one obtains,
Γ amalgamated with n copies of G, each along a copy of Z, all of the obvious
generators have been identified with something that must have trivial image in
every finite quotient.
   In the light of (3.6) and (3.12), the above operations can be carried out within the
class of fundamental groups of compact non-positively curved spaces. Moreover, by
making the gluing tubes sufficiently long one can ensure that the natural embedding
of X into the final space is isometric. This proves (3.13). An alternative proof,
which uses the elementary construction from (3.10) instead of (3.6), is given in [31].

3.14    Complexes of groups
I want to mention one other general technique for constructing group actions on
CAT(0) spaces: complexes of groups in the sense of Haefliger. The foundations of
the subject are rather technical, so I am afraid that I can only give a rather vague
outline of the theory — see [71, 72] and [33] (II.12) and (III) for details.
   To illustrate the construction, let’s consider triangles of groups. A triangle of
groups is a diagram of groups and monomorphisms as shown is Figure 3.3.
   One way in which such diagrams are obtained is by recording the stabilizers
of vertices, edges and the 2-cell in a strict fundamental domain for the simplicial
action of a group Γ on a simply connected simplicial 2-complex X; these stabilizers
are called the local groups of the complex. If the triangle of groups arises in this way,
then by taking the pushout of the diagram in the category of groups one recovers

                                            159
Γ, and hence it is reasonable to call Γ the fundamental group of the triangle of
groups. Moreover, by taking the geometric realization of the poset of the cosets of
the local groups in Γ, one can recover the complex X and the action of Γ on it (see
[71], [108], [26]).
   A similar process of recovery works for more general group actions on complexes
where there is a strict fundamental domain, and is explained in [72] and [33, II.12].
In this more general setting, the stabilizers are arranged not into a triangle of groups
but into a complex of groups in the sense of Haefliger. A more sophisticated notion
is needed in order to handle actions which do not have a strict fundamental domain
(see [72] or [33, III.C]).
   The theory of complexes of group generalizes the Bass-Serre theory of graphs of
groups [105]. In contrast to the 1-dimensional case (graphs), complexes of groups
do not in general arise as the pattern of stabilizers of a group action on a simply
connected space, i.e. they may not be “developable”. However, if the complex of
groups is non-positively curved in a suitable sense (see [71, 72], [33, III.C], [108]),
then it is indeed developable, and its fundamental group will act on a CAT(0) space
in a manner dictated by the complex of groups.

3-manifolds of non-positive curvature
Let me finish this lecture by turning from complexes to manifolds. In this section I
shall assume more knowledge of topology than is required elsewhere in this series.

Theorem 3.15 Let M be a compact 3-manifold with non-empty boundary. If every
2-sphere in M bounds a ball, then M supports a metric of non-positive curvature.

Remarks (1) Throughout this article, we use the term non-positive curvature in
the sense of A.D. Alexandrov. In the setting of the above theorem one can always
arrange for the metrics considered to be smooth Riemannian metrics on the interior
of the manifold, but the boundary will not in general be locally convex — indeed
if it were then it would perforce be π1 -injective (2.3) which cannot happen if π1 M
is free.
    (2) The case where the boundary of M has zero Euler characteristic was dealt
with by Leeb in his thesis [80]. The argument sketched below is worked out in
detail in [29].

   The first step in the proof involves cutting the given manifold up according to
the JSJ decomposition [75], [76], [112]. This means that one cuts along a maxi-
mal non-parallel family of π1 -embedded discs, tori and Klein bottles. Thurston’s
Geometrization Theorem for Haken manifolds states that the pieces each have a
geometric structure. It is easy to show that each piece supports a metric of non-
positive curvature such that the boundary tori and Klein bottles are convex. In
order to reassemble the original manifold we must perturb the metrics on the pieces
so that the pairs of tori and Klein bottles to be glued are isometric.
   On the geometrically finite hyperbolic pieces, the tori and Klein bottles corre-
spond to cusps truncated by horoballs (cf. 3.2(3)), and by truncating further down


                                          160
the cusp one can shrink the area of each such boundary component without chang-
ing the metric away from the cusp. One can also adjust the conformal type of each
such boundary component using a standard warping technique, which is explained
nicely by Viktor Schroeder in [102]. (Schroeder also tells me that there is a more
detailed account by Buyalo in an appendix to the Russian edition of [118].)
   Having organized the tori and Klein bottle boundary components on the ge-
ometric pieces appropriately so that they can be glued (the Seifert fibred pieces
do not cause any serious problems and are dealt with in [80]), the only problem
that we face in trying to reassemble the original manifold is that we must be able
to perform the boundary sums (the inverse operation of cutting along discs) in a
manner that preserves non-positive curvature. For this one uses gluing tubes of
different types:

3.16    Gluing tubes
Suppose that we have two 3-manifolds with flat boundary components and we wish
to glue them along isometric discs in these components. To achieve this we take a
tube of Euclidean type (the product of an appropriately metrized topological disc
D with [0, 1]) and we attach the ends D × {0} and D × {1} to the discs on the
boundaries of the manifolds. The resulting manifold is the boundary sum of the
pieces, and if the pieces were non-positively curved, so is the result, by (3.11).
   If the boundary of the pieces were not flat but instead contained an isometri-
cally embedded hyperbolic disc (of small radius)9 , then instead of using a product
cylinder one would use a tube of hyperbolic type (the intersection of a tubular
neighbourhood of a geodesic c in H3 with the complement of two disjoint open
half-spaces whose bounding hyperplanes are orthogonal to c).
   The use of suitable tubes also allows one to combine pieces with hyperbolic
patches on their boundary with pieces that have Euclidean boundary. For this
one uses a tube of mixed type: such a tube is a compact subset of H3 obtained
by intersecting a tubular neighbourhood of a geodesic c, with the complement of
an open horoball about one endpoint of c, and a closed half-space (containing the
open horoball) that is bounded by a hyperplane orthogonal to c. In the induced
path metric, this tube is non-positively curved; both ends of the tube are convex in
this metric; the end lying on the bounding hyperplane is isometric to a disc in the
hyperbolic plane, and the end on the horosphere is isometric to a Euclidean disc.
   The full process of reassembling the 3-manifold also requires that one combine
certain scaled copies of the tubes of mixed type. See [29] for details.


Lecture 4: Decision problems
In the first half of this lecture we return to our point of departure in Lecture 1:
the basic decision problems of combinatorial group theory as framed as Dehn. I
shall describe how one solves the word and conjugacy problems for groups which
  9
     This is what happens on boundary components of higher genus associated to geometrically
finite hyperbolic pieces.


                                            161
 act properly and cocompactly by isometries on CAT(0) spaces and I shall describe
 a solution to the conjugacy problem for hyperbolic groups. I shall also discuss the
 isomorphism problem briefly (without proofs) and explain how it is connected to
 classification problems in geometry and topology, following [33, III].
    In the second half of this lecture I shall present a number of recent results that
 relate to the following question: Let X be a compact non-positively curved space
 and let Γ ≤ π1 X be a subgroup. Under what circumstances can one deduce that Γ
 is the fundamental group of a compact non-positively curved space?

 Non-positive curvature and the word and conjugacy problems
 We discussed the word problem for hyperbolic groups in Lecture 1, indeed it was
 the bridge that led us to into our discussion of negative curvature. Recall:

 Theorem 4.1 The following statements are equivalent for f.p. groups: numdepth
 ¿3 oodeep
1. Γ is a hyperbolic group.
2. Γ has a finite Dehn presentation.
3. Γ satisfies a linear isoperimetric inequality.
4. Γ satisfies a sub-quadratic isoperimetric inequality.

    There exist non-hyperbolic groups that act properly and cocompactly by isome-
 tries on CAT(0) spaces, e.g. Z2 , so point (3) of the above theorem shows the
 quadratic bound in the following result is sharp.

 Theorem 4.2 If Γ acts properly and cocompactly by isometries on a CAT(0) space
 X, then it is finitely presented and satisfies a quadratic isoperimetric inequality.

 Proof I’ll sketch the proof, following [33, III]. Fix x0 ∈ X and D > 0 such that
 X is the union of the balls γ.B(x0 , D/3). General considerations of group actions
 (cf. 1.13) yield:

 A = {a ∈ Γ | d(a.x0 , x0 ) ≤ 2D+1} generates Γ. Given γ ∈ Γ, if d(x0 , γ.x0 ) ≤ 4D+1
 then γ = a1 . . . al for some ai ∈ A and l ≤ 4. Let R be the set of words in the
 free group F (A) that have length at most 10 and represent the identity in Γ. Then
 hA | Ri is a finite presentation for Γ.

    We shall see that if a word w = b1 . . . bm , with bj ∈ A±1 , represents 1 ∈ Γ then
 w can be expressed in the free group F (A) as a product of at most (D + 1)m2
 conjugates of relators r ∈ R. The proof will also show that the length of the
 conjugating elements is bounded by a linear function of m.
    To each γ ∈ Γ we associate a word σγ in the generators A as follows. Let cγ be
 the unique geodesic joining x0 to γ.x0 in X. For each integer i < d(x0 , γ.x0 ) + 1 let
 σγ (i) ∈ Γ be such that d(cγ (i), σγ (i).x0 ) ≤ D, with σγ (0) = 1 and σγ (i) = γ when
 i is large enough. Note that ai = σγ (i)−1 σγ (i + 1) ∈ A. Define σγ to be a0 . . . an ,


                                           162
where n is the least integer greater than d(x0 , γ.x0 ). Note that γ = σγ in Γ. We
choose σ1 to be the empty word.
   We fix γ ∈ Γ and b ∈ A and compare σγ with σγ 0 where γ 0 = γb. By appending
letters ai that represent the identity if necessary, we may write σγ = a0 . . . an
and σγ 0 = a00 . . . a0n , where n = n(γ, γ 0 ) = max{|σγ |, |σγ 0 |}. Now d(γ.x0 , γ 0 .x0 ) ≤
2D + 1 (because b ∈ A), so from the convexity of the metric on X (2.4) we have
d(cγ (i), cγ 0 (i)) < 2D + 1 for all i and hence d(σγ (i).x0 , σγ 0 (i).x0 ) < 4D + 1. If for
each i we choose a word α(i) of length at most 4 that is equal to σγ (i)−1 σγ 0 (i), then
α(i)−1 ai+1 α(i + 1)a0i+1 −1 ∈ R. We choose α(n) to be b (the difference between γ
and γ 0 ), and α0 to be the empty word.
   If we write pγ (i) for the word a0 . . . ai (the i-th prefix of σγ ), and define pγ 0 (i)
similarly, then we have the following equality in the free group on A:
                        n(γ,γ 0 )               h                         i
                          Y                                            −1
           σγ bσγ−1
                  0 =               pγ 0 (i − 1) α(i − 1)−1 ai α(i)a0i      pγ 0 (i − 1)−1 .
                          i=1

Each of the words in square brackets belongs to R.
  Finally, we consider the given word w = b1 . . . bm that represents the identity in
Γ. Let γ0 = 1 and let γj ∈ Γ be the element represented by b1 . . . bj . Note γm = 1
and σγm = σγ0 is the empty word. By definition, in F (A) we have the equality
                                               m
                                               Y
                                         w=          σγj−1 bj σγ−1
                                                                 j
                                                                   .
                                               j=1

By replacing each factor on the right hand side of this equality with the right hand
side of the previous equation (with γ = γj−1 , b = bj , and γ 0 = γj ), we obtain the
desired quadratic inequality. (To check the bounds on the number of factors note
that d(γj .x0 , x0 ) ≤ (2D + 1)|w|/2.)                                            2

Remarks (1) In the course of the preceding proof we proved that every relation
w = 1 is a consequence of the given relations R.
   (2) The idea behind the preceding proof becomes more transparent if one trans-
lates it into the language of van Kampen diagrams (cf. [28]).

The conjugacy problem
The discussion in this section follows [33, III]. Many of the basic ideas can be found
in [68, 69].
   The way in which we shall solve the conjugacy problem for groups that act
properly and cocompactly by isometries on CAT(0) spaces is motivated by the
following geometric observation: given l > 0, if two loops of length ≤ l are freely
homotopic in a complete non-positively curved space, then one can continuously
deform one to the other through intermediate loops of length ≤ l. Free homotopy
classes of loops in a space X correspond to conjugacy classes in π1 X, and quasifying
the above observation we are led to the following definition in which the elements
wi−1 uwi ∈ Γ are the analogues of the intermediate loops in the free homotopy.

                                                     163
Definition 4.3 (q.m.c.) A group Γ with finite generating set A is said to have
the quasi-monotone conjugacy property (q.m.c) if there is a constant K > 0 such
that if two words u, v ∈ F (A) are conjugate in Γ, then there is a word w = a1 . . . an
with ai ∈ A±1 , such that w−1 uw = v and d(1, wi−1 uwi ) ≤ K max{|u|, |v|} for
i = 1, . . . , n, where wi = a1 . . . ai .

  The existence of K does not depend on the choice of generating set A but its
value does.

Proposition 4.4 If a group Γ acts properly and cocompactly by isometries on a
CAT(0) space, then it has q.m.c.

Proof [Sketch] Suppose that Γ acts on X. Fix x0 ∈ X and let A and σγ be as in
the proof of (4.2). Given words u and v such that γ −1 uγ = v in Γ, one verifies that
w := σγ satisfies the requirements of (4.3) (with respect to a constant that depends
only on the parameters of the quasi-isometry γ 7→ γ.x0 described in (1.13)). To
perform this verification, one uses the convexity of the metric on X (2.4) to compare
the geodesic quadrilateral in X with vertices {x0 , γ.x0 , u.x0 , γu.x0 = vγ.x0 } to a
quadrilateral Q in the Cayley graph CA (Γ). The vertices of Q are {1, γ, u, γu = vγ},
two of its sides are labelled σγ , and the other two sides are labelled u and v.    2

4.5   An algorithm to determine conjugacy
Let Γ be a group with finite generating set A. Suppose that Γ has a solvable word
problem and also has the q.m.c. property. Let the constant K be as in (4.3).
    For each positive integer n, we consider the set B(n) of words in F (A) that have
length at most n. Because Γ has a solvable word problem, given a pair of words
v1 , v2 ∈ B(n) one can decide if there exists a ∈ A±1 such that a−1 v1 a = v2 in Γ; if
such an a exists we write v1 ∼ v2 .
    Consider the (algorithmically constructed) finite graph G(n) with vertex set B(n)
that has an edge joining v1 to v2 if and only if v1 ∼ v2 . The q.m.c. property says
precisely that two words u and v are conjugate in Γ if and only if u and v lie in
the same path connected component of G(n), where n = K max{|u|, |v|}. Thus we
may decide if u and v represent conjugate elements of Γ.

The conjugacy problem for hyperbolic groups
Hyperbolic groups also satisfy that q.m.c. condition and hence have a solvable con-
jugacy problem. I shall describe a more efficient way to solve the conjugacy problem
in this case. (David Epstein has recently discovered an even quicker algorithm.)
    In a free group it is easy to solve the conjugacy problem. By definition, a word
w = a0 . . . an in the free group on A is cyclically reduced if a−1i  6= ai+1 for 1 =
0, . . . , n − 1, and a−1
                       0  6 = an . Given two words u and v, in order to  check if they
define conjugate elements of F (A) one cyclically reduces both words and then looks
to see if one of the resulting words is a cyclic permutation of the other.
    We wish to quasify this simple solution to the conjugacy problem in order to
solve the conjugacy problem for hyperbolic groups. With this is mind, note that a

                                         164
 word in F (A) is cyclically reduced if and only if it and all of its cyclic permutations
 are geodesic words. And recall (1.26) that geodesics in hyperbolic groups are well-
 approximated by local-geodesics. These facts motivate:
 Proposition 4.6 Let Γ be a group that is δ-hyperbolic with respect to the finite
 generating set A. There exist constants L and K, depending only on δ, such that
 if u, v ∈ F (A) represent conjugate elements of Γ, and if u, v and all of their cyclic
 permutations are L-local geodesics, then numdepth ¿3 oodeep
1. max{|u|, |v|} ≤ K, or else
2. there exists a word w ∈ F (A) of length at most K such that w−1 u0 w = v 0 in Γ,
 where u0 and v 0 are cyclic permutations of u and v.
   See [33, III] for a proof.

 4.7   An algorithm to decide conjugacy in hyperbolic groups
 Let Γ be a group that is δ-hyperbolic with respect to the finite generating set A.
 Given two words u and v over the alphabet A±1 , one looks for subwords of length
 ≤ L in u, v and their cyclic permutations that are not geodesic, where L is the
 constant of (4.6). If such a subword is found, one replaces it by a geodesic word
 representing the same group element. One continues this process until u and v have
 been replaced by (conjugate) words u0 and v 0 all of whose cyclic permutations are
 L-local geodesics. Let u0 and v 0 be the resulting words. The preceding proposition
 provides a finite set of words Σ such that u is conjugate to v in Γ if and only if
 w−1 u0 w = v 0 in Γ for some w ∈ Σ. And using Dehn’s algorithm one can decide
 whether any of the putative relations w−1 u0 w = v 0 is actually valid in Γ.

 The conjugacy problem for subgroups
 Suppose that Γ acts properly and cocompactly by isometries on a CAT(0) space.
 We shall see a little later that Γ may contain finitely presented subgroups with an
 unsolvable conjugacy problem. On the other hand:
 Theorem 4.8 ([29]) If Γ acts properly and cocompactly by isometries on a CAT(0)
 space and if Q is a group in which the generalized word problem is solvable, then
 the kernel of any homomorphism Γ → Q has a solvable conjugacy problem.
   A key point in the proof of this result is that there is an algorithm which given
 γ ∈ Γ will compute a finite set of generators for Cγ (Γ); this uses ideas of Hamish
 Short [107].

 Isomorphism problems
 The ideas used in the proof of the following beautiful theorem of Zlil Sela [104]
 have not been discussed in these notes.
 Theorem 4.9 The isomorphism problem is solvable among torsion-free hyperbolic
 groups.

                                           165
Distinguishing among non-positively curved manifolds
Closed 2-manifolds were classified in the nineteenth century — they are determined
up to homeomorphism by orientability and Euler characteristic. If Thurston’s Ge-
ometrization Conjecture [112] is true then the homeomorphism problem for com-
pact 3-manifolds is also solvable. In other words, there is an algorithm which takes
as input pairs of compact 3-manifolds and answers YES or NO, after a finite amount
of time, according to whether or not the manifolds are homeomorphic. (We are
implicitly assuming that the manifolds under consideration are described as finite
objects. For the sake of argument, let us suppose that they are specified as finite
simplicial complexes.)
   For each n ≥ 4, there is an algorithm that associates to any finite presentation
P a closed n-manifold with fundamental group |P|. Using this fact, Markov [84]
proved that there does not exist an algorithm to decide homeomorphism among
(smooth, PL or topological) manifolds in general.
   On the other hand, if one restricts one’s attention to manifolds of negative cur-
vature then the homeomorphism problem is solvable. To see this one needs the
following deep topological rigidity theorem of Farrell and Jones [61].

Theorem 4.10 Let n ≥ 5 and let M and N be closed non-positively curved n-
manifolds. If π1 M ∼
                   = π1 N , then M and N are homeomorphic.

  As Sela pointed out in [104], combining (4.9) and (4.10) one gets:

Theorem 4.11 Let n ≥ 5 be an integer. There exists an algorithm which takes
as input two compact n-manifolds that support metrics of negative curvature, and
which (after a finite amount of time) will stop and answer YES or NO according
to whether or not the manifolds are homeomorphic.

  Cautious readers should interpret (4.12) as a statement regarding the homeo-
morphism problem for recursive classes of negatively curved manifolds.

Question 4.12 Is there an algorithm to decide homeomorphism among closed non-
positively curved manifolds in each dimension n ≥ 4?

   I strongly suspect that the answer to this question is no. In the light of (4.11), in
order to provide a negative answer one should show that the isomorphism problem
for the fundamental class of such manifolds is unsolvable. For the moment I cannot
even prove this with manifolds replaced by complexes. The only result in this
direction is:

Theorem 4.13 ([13]) There is a closed polyhedral manifold M of non-positive
curvature and a recursive sequence of covering spaces M  ci → M, i ∈ N, with each
   c
π1 Mi finitely presented, such that there does not exist an algorithm to determine
whether or not Mi is homotopy equivalent to M0 .




                                          166
The subgroup question
Let me now turn to the basic question that I articulated at the beginning of this
lecture:

Question 4.14 (The subgroup question10 ) Let X be a compact non-positively
curved space and let Γ ≤ π1 X be a subgroup. Under what circumstances can one
deduce that Γ is the fundamental group of a compact non-positively curved space?

   One might regard this question as a special case of the broader question: might
there exist an algebraic characterization of the groups Γ that act properly and
cocompactly by isometries on CAT(0) spaces? However (4.14) has other facets.
For example, since any compact non-positively space X has the homotopy type
of K(π1 X, 1), Question (4.14) can be rephrased as: under what circumstances
does a finitely presented covering space of a non-positively curved space have the
homotopy type of a compact non-positively curved space? In turn, this question is
related to the existence of compact cores, in the sense of [103].

Subgroups of hyperbolic groups
Recall the modified Rips construction (3.9). In the following discussion we shall
maintain the notation established in (3.9).
  We first apply (3.9) in tandem with a theorem of Robert Bieri [19]:

Theorem 4.15 If a normal subgroup of a group of cohomological dimension 2 is
finitely presented, then that subgroup is either free or of finite index.

   It is not hard to show that the group N in the Rips construction (3.9) is not free
if G is infinite and therefore:

Corollary 4.16 In the notation of (3.9), the subgroup N is finitely presentable if
and only if G is finite.

Remarks (1) Baumslag, Miller and Short [14] observed that since there is no
algorithm to decide if a group given by an arbitrary finite presentation is finite,
(4.16) can be used to show that there is no algorithm to decide if a finitely generated
subgroup of a hyperbolic group is finitely presented. See [14] for further results in
this vein.
   (2) We have just seen that one can produce finitely generated subgroups of
hyperbolic groups that are not finitely presented and hence not hyperbolic. It is
much more difficult to construct finitely presented subgroups of hyperbolic groups
which are not themselves hyperbolic. At present the only construction of such
subgroups is that given by Noel Brady [25]. In [62] Steve Gersten shows that if G
is a hyperbolic group of cohomological dimension two, then every finitely presented
subgroup of G is also hyperbolic.
  10
    In order to allow torsion, one ought to restate this question in terms of proper cocompact
actions by groups of isometries. I have chosen the simpler form for expository reasons.


                                             167
Positive answers to the subgroup question in low dimensions
In low dimensions there are clear positive answers to the subgroup closure question
(4.14). If X is 1-dimensional then in order to get the desired action it is sufficient
to assume that Γ ⊂ π1 X is finitely generated — subgroups of free groups are
free! In (4.16) we saw that in dimension 2 it is not sufficient to assume that Γ
is finitely generated — if Γ is to be the fundamental group of a compact non-
positively curved space then it must be finitely presented. However the absence
of finite presentability turns out to be the only obstruction in dimension 2. This
follows from a very general result that I learnt from Peter Shalen:

Theorem 4.17 (Subgroup closure theorem) Let K be a class of combinatorial
CW complexes that is closed under passage to connected subcomplexes and covering
spaces. If K ∈ K and H is a finitely presented subgroup of π1 K, then there is a
compact X ∈ K of dimension at most 2 such that π1 X ∼ = H.

   By definition, a combinatorial map between CW complexes is one that takes
open cells homeomorphically onto cells. A complex is called combinatorial if all of
its attaching maps are combinatorial.
   When endowed with the unique path metric that makes the covering map a local
isometry, a covering of any non-positively curve space is obviously non-positively
curved. Thus one can apply the above theorem to any class of non-positively curved
complexes that is closed under passage to subcomplexes. It is clear from the link
condition (3.4) that 2-dimensional complexes satisfy this condition, thus:

Corollary 4.18 If X is a compact non-positively curved 2-complex, then every
finitely presented subgroup of π1 X is also the fundamental group of such a complex.

  One proves the Subgroup closure theorem by means of a tower argument. Towers
were developed in the context of 3-manifolds by C.D. Papakyriakopoulos [94] and
adapted to the setting of combinatorial complexes by Jim Howie [74].

Definition 4.19 (of a tower) A tower map (of height h) is a map g : Kh → L0
between connected CW complexes that admits a decomposition

                              g = i0 ◦ p1 ◦ ∙ ∙ ∙ ◦ ph ◦ ih ,

where each ir : Kr → Lr is the inclusion of a connected subcomplex, and each
pr : Lr → Kr−1 is a connected covering. A tower lifting of a continuous map
                                                                f0   g
f : Y → L of CW -complexes is a factorization f : Y →K → L where g is a tower
map.

  Howie [74, 3.1] gives an integer valued measure of complexity for combinatorial
maps that is reduced by passage to proper coverings. Thus he proves:

Lemma 4.20 If Y and L are connected CW complexes and Y is compact, then
                                                                         f0   g
every combinatorial map f : Y → L has a (maximal) tower lift f : Y →K → L with
f∗0 : π1 Y → π1 K surjective.

                                           168
  One uses (4.20) in tandem with the following enhanced version of van Kampen’s
Lemma [77], a detailed proof of which can be found in [33]; see also [62].

Lemma 4.21 If X is a combinatorial complex, G is a finitely presented group and
ψ : G → π1 (X, xo ) is a homomorphism, then there exists a compact 2-complex Y
with π1 (Y, yo ) ∼
                 = G and a combinatorial map f : Y → X such that f (yo ) = xo and
the following diagram commutes:
                                    ψ
                        G                   π1 (X, x0 )

                           ∼
                           =
                                      f∗
                     π1 (Y, y0 )                 π1 (X, x0 ).



  When taken together, these lemmas prove the Subgroup closure theorem.

3-manifolds
The examples described in (4.23) show that (4.18) cannot be extended to complexes
of any dimension greater than 2. But in the setting of manifolds there is a subgroup
closure result in dimension 3.

Theorem 4.22 If M is a compact non-positively curved 3-manifold, then every
finitely generated subgroup of π1 M is the fundamental group of a compact non-
positively curved 3-manifold.

  This theorem is proved in [29]; it is a consequence of Scott’s Compact Core
Theorem [103] and (3.15). The manifolds considered may have boundary.

Cohomological obstructions
Example 4.23 Let F be a free group of rank two, let Pn be the direct product of
n copies of F and let hn : Pn → Z be a map whose restriction to each factor is a
surjection. Let SBn = ker hn .
   Following earlier work of Stallings [109] on the case n = 3, in [20] Bieri showed
that if n ≥ 3 then SBn is finitely presented and that there is an Eilenberg-Maclane
space K(SBn , 1) with a finite (n − 1)-skeleton, but H n (SBn , Z) is not finitely gen-
erated and hence there is no K(SBn , 1) with a finite n-skeleton. It follows from
2.1(7) that SBn is not the fundamental group of any compact non-positively curved
space. (It does however satisfy the other properties listed in (2.1) — see [30].)

Bad subgroups via fibre products
In this section I shall explain how Baumslag, Miller, Short and I exploited the
modified Rips construction (3.9) in [13].


                                           169
   The Rips construction encodes the pathologies of arbitrary finite group presen-
tations into pairs of groups N ⊂ Γ, where Γ is the fundamental group of a compact
negatively curved complex and N is a finitely generated subgroup. Here is an
example of how this pathology gets transmitted:

Proposition 4.24 In the notation of (3.9): if G = Γ/N has an unsolvable word
problem, then N ⊂ Γ (which is finitely generated) has an unsolvable conjugacy
problem.

Proof We continue with the notation of (3.9). Fix a ∈ a. Since Γ is torsion-free
and hyperbolic, the centralizer of a is cyclic (1.36). Moreover, one can arrange for
a to be the generator of its centralizer (see [33, II.5] or [13]).
   Given a word w in the generators X one can use the relations U to rewrite
  −1
w aw as a word ŵ in the generators a. If w ∈ N then obviously ŵ is conjugate
to a in N . Conversely, if n−1 an = ŵ, then n−1 w centralizes a and hence w = nar
for some r. It follows that w ∈ N if and only if ŵ is conjugate to a in N . But w
is in N if and only if w = 1 in G = Γ/N , and we are assuming that there is no
algorithm to decide if w = 1 in G.                                                2

   Constructing finitely presented subgroups which display the sort of pathologies
described in (4.24) is much harder. The key to doing so is the following technical
theorem. A group G is said to be of type F3 if there is a K(G, 1) with a finite
3-skeleton.
                                                                       p
Theorem 4.25 (The 1-2-3 theorem) Suppose that 1 → N → Γ→G → 1 is
exact, and consider the fibre product:

                     P := {(γ1 , γ2 ) | p(γ1 ) = p(γ2 )} ⊆ Γ × Γ.

If N is finitely generated, Γ is finitely presented and G is of type F3 , then P is
finitely presented.

   The name of this theorem comes from the fact that the groups N, Γ and G are
assumed to be of type F1 , F2 and F3 respectively. (Results similar to this, cast in
the language of pictures, can be found in [5].)
   The product of non-positively curved complexes is non-positively curved, so
we may use the 1-2-3 theorem in tandem with the modified Rips construction in
order to construct non-positively curved 4-dimensional complexes whose finitely
presented subgroups display various pathologies.

Theorem 4.26 There exist hyperbolic groups Γ and finitely presented subgroups
P ⊂ Γ × Γ such that there is no algorithm to decide membership of P , and the
conjugacy problem for P is unsolvable. (And Γ is the fundamental group of a
compact negatively curved 2-complex.)

  A subtle argument involving (4.26), a judicious choice of HNN extension and a
careful analysis of centralizers, yields:

                                         170
 Theorem 4.27 There exists a compact non-positively curved 4-complex X and a
 recursive class of finitely presented subgroups Hn ⊂ π1 X (n ∈ N) such that there is
 no algorithm to determine if Hn is (abstractly) isomorphic to H0 .

   By a process of relative hyperbolization one can isometrically embed X in a
 polyhedral manifold, hence (4.13).
   Let me finish be stating a result intended to illustrate how subtle the Subgroup
 question (4.14) can be:

 Theorem 4.28 ([29]) There exists a closed non-positively curved manifold of di-
 mension nine whose fundamental group has a subgroup H ⊂ Γ such that: numdepth
 ¿3 oodeep
1. H has a finite K(H, 1),
2. H satisfies a quadratic isoperimetric inequality,
3. H has a solvable conjugacy problem,
4. the centralizer CH (h) of every h ∈ H is finitely presented, but
5. there exist h ∈ H such that CH (h) does not satisfy a quadratic isoperimetric
 inequality, and therefore H does not act properly and cocompactly by isometries on
 any CAT(0) space.


 References
   [1] S. B. Alexander and R. L. Bishop, “The Hadamard–Cartan theorem in locally convex
       spaces”, Enseign. Math. 36 (1990) 309–320.
   [2] A. D. Alexandrov, “A theorem on triangles in a metric space and some of its appli-
       cations”, Trudy Mat. Inst. Steklov 38 (1951) 5-23.
   [3] J. M. Alonso, “Inégalités isopérimétriques et quasi-isométries”, C.R. Acad. Sci.
       Paris Sér. 1 Math. 311 (1990) 761–764.
   [4] J. M. Alonso and M. R. Bridson, “Semihyperbolic groups”, Proc. London Math.
       Soc. (3) 70 (1995) 56–114.
   [5] Y.G. Baik, J. Harlander and S.J. Pride, The Geometry of Group Extensions, Preprint,
       University of Glasgow, 1997.
   [6] W. Ballmann, Lectures on Spaces of Nonpositive Curvature, DMV Seminar, Band
       25, Birkäuser, Basel, Boston, Berlin 1995.
   [7] W. Ballmann and M. Brin, “Polygonal complexes and combinatorial group theory”,
       Geom. Dedicata 50 (1994) 164-191.
   [8] W. Ballmann and S. Buyalo, “Non-positively curved metrics on 2-polyhedra”, Math.
       Z. 222 (1996) 97–134.
   [9] W. Ballmann, M. Gromov, V. Schroeder, “Manifolds of nonpositive curvature”, Prog.
       Math. 61 Birkäuser, Boston, 1985
  [10] V. Bangert and V. Schroeder “Existence of flat tori in analytic manifolds of nonpos-
       itive curvature Ann. Sci. Ecole Num. Sup. 24 (1991) 605–634.
  [11] C. Baribaud, Travail de diplôme, Univ. de Genève, 1993.
  [12] G. Baumslag, M. R. Bridson, C. F. Miller III and H. B. Short, “Subgroups of au-
       tomatic groups and their isoperimetric inequalities”, J. London Math. Soc.(2) 56
       (1997) 292–304.


                                            171
[13] G. Baumslag, M. R. Bridson, C. F. Miller III and H. B. Short, Fibre products, non-
     positive curvature and decision problems, Preprint, Oxford 1998.
[14] G. Baumslag, C. F. Miller III and H. Short, “Unsolvable problems about small can-
     cellation groups and word hyperbolic groups”, Bull. London Math. Soc. 23 (1993)
     97–101.
[15] G. Baumslag and J.E. Roseblade, “Subgroups of Direct Products of Two Free
     Groups” J. London Math. Soc. (2) 30 (1984) 44–52.
[16] G. Baumslag and D. Solitar “Some two-generator one-relator non-Hopfian groups”,
     Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 68 (1962) 199–201.
[17] Nadia Benakli, “Polyèdres à géométrie locale donnée”, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 313
     (1991) 561–564.
[18] M. Bestvina and N. Brady, “Morse theory and finitenesss properties of groups”,
     Invent. Math 129 (1997) 445–470.
[19] R. Bieri, “Normal subgroups in duality groups and in groups of cohomological di-
     mension 2”, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 7 (1976) 32–52.
[20] R. Bieri, “Homological dimension of discrete groups”, Queen Mary Lecture Notes.
[21] O. V. Bogopolskii and V. N. Gerasimov, “Finite subgroups of hyperbolic groups”,
     Algebra and Logic 34 (1995) 343–345.
[22] B. Bowditch, “Notes on Gromov’s hyperbolicity criterion for path-metric spaces in
     Group theory from a geometrical viewpoint”, eds. E. Ghys, A. Haefliger, A. Ver-
     jovsky, Proc. ICTP Trieste, World Scientific, Singapore (1991) 373–464.
[23] B. Bowditch “A short proof that a subquadratic isoperimetric inequality implies a
     linear one”, Michigan J. Math. 42 (1995) 103–107.
[24] B. Bowditch “Minkowskian subspaces of non-positively curved metric spaces”, Bull.
     London Math. Soc. 27(1995) 575–584.
[25] N. Brady, “A non-hyperbolic finitely presented subgroup of a hyperbolic group”,
     J. London Math. Soc., to appear.
[26] M. R. Bridson, “Geodesics and curvature in metric simplicial complexes”, in Group
     theory from a geometrical viewpoint, eds. E. Ghys, A. Haefliger, A. Verjovsky Proc.
     ICTP Trieste, World Scientific, Singapore (1991) 373–464.
[27] M. R. Bridson, “On the existence of flat planes in spaces of nonpositive curvature”,
     Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 123 (1995) 223–235.
[28] M. R. Bridson, “On the geometry of normal forms in discrete groups”, Proc. London
     Math. Soc.(3) 67 (1993) 596–616.
[29] M. R. Bridson, “On the subgroups of semihyperbolic groups”, Preprint, Oxford 1998.
[30] M. R. Bridson “Doubles, finiteness properties of groups and the quadratic isoperi-
     metric inequality J. Algebra, to appear.
[31] M. R. Bridson, “Controlled embeddings into groups that have no non-trivial finite
     quotients”, J. Geom. Topol., to appear.
[32] M.R. Bridson and S.M. Gersten “The optimal isoperimetric inequality for torus bun-
     dles over the circle”, Quart. J. Math. 47 (1996), 1–23.
[33] M.R. Bridson and A. Haefliger, Metric spaces of non-positive curvature, Springer-
     Verlag, to appear.
[34] M. R. Bridson and L. Mosher, “Metrics of non-positive curvature on 3-manifolds”,
     in preparation.
[35] M. R. Bridson and D. Wise, “VH-complexes, towers, and subgroups of F ×F ”, Math.
     Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc., to appear.
[36] K. S. Brown Buildings, Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1988.
[37] F. Bruhat et J. Tits, “Groupes réductifs sur un corps local. I. Données radiciells
     valuées”, I.H.E.S Publ. Math. 41 (1972) 5–251.
[38] Y. Burago, M. Gromov and G. Perel’man, “A. D. Alexandrov spaces with curvature


                                          172
     bounded below”, Russian Math. Surveys 47:2 (1992) 3–51.
[39] M. Burger and S. Mozes, “Finitely presented simple groups and products of trees”,
     C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér 1 Math 324.I (1997) 747–752.
[40] H. Busemann, “Spaces with non-positive curvature”, Acta Math. 48 (1947) 234–267.
[41] S. Buyalo, “Euclidean planes in open 3-dimensional manifolds of non-positive curva-
     ture”, St. Petersburg Math J. 3 (1992) 83–96.
[42] J. W. Cannon, “ The combinatorial structure of cocompact discrete hyperbolic
     groups” Geom. Dedicata 16 (1984) 123–148.
[43] J. W. Cannon, “The theory of negatively curved spaces and groups” in Ergodic theory,
     symbolic dynamics and hyperbolic spaces, eds. T. Bedford, M. Keane, C. Series.
     Oxford Univ. Press, New York (1991) 315–369.
[44] E. Cartan, Leçons sur la géométrie des espaces de Riemann, Gauthier-Villars, Paris
     1928.
[45] A. Cayley “On the theory of groups”, Proc. London Math. Soc., 9 (1878) 126–133.
[46] B. Chandler and W. Magnus, “The history of combinatorial group theory”, Springer
     Verlag, New York 1982.
[47] R. Charney and M. Davis, “Strict hyperbolization”, Topology 34 (1995) 329–350.
[48] J. Cheeger and B. Ebin, Comparison Theorems in Riemannian Geometry, North
     Holland, Amsterdam 1975.
[49] M. Coonaert, T. Delzant and A. Papadopoloulos, Notes sur les groupes hyperboliques
     de Gromov, Springer Verlag, LN 1441 Berlin, Heidelberg, New York.
[50] M.W. Davis, “Groups generated by reflections and aspherical manifolds not covered
     Euclidean space”, Ann. Math. (2) 117 (1983) 293–324.
[51] M. Davis and T. Januszkiewicz, “Hyperbolization of polyhedra”, J. Differential
     Geom. 34 (1991) 347–388.
[52] M. Dehn, Papers on group theory and topology, translated and introduced by John
     Stillwell, Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York 1987.
[53] M. Dehn, “Transformationen der Kurven auf zweiseitigen Flächen”, Math. Ann. 72
     (1912) 413–421.
[54] M. Dehn, “Uber unendliche diskontinuierliche Gruppen”, Math. Ann. 71 (1912)
     116–144.
[55] T. Delzant, “Sous-groupes distingués et quotients des groupes hyperboliques”, Duke
     Math. J. 83 (1996) 661–682.
[56] W. von Dyck, “Gruppentheoretische Studien”, Math. Ann. 20 (1882) 1–45.
[57] P. B. Eberlein, “Geodesic flow in certain manifolds without conjugate points”, Trans.
     Amer. Math. Soc. 167 (1972) 151–170.
[58] V.A. Efromovich “The proximity geometry of Riemannian manifolds”, Uspekhi Math.
     Nauk 8 (1953) 189–195,
[59] D.B.A. Epstein, J.W. Cannon, D.F. Holt, S.V.F. Levy, M.S. Paterson, and W.P.
     Thurston, Word Processing in Groups, Jones and Bartlett, Boston MA, 1992.
[60] B. Farb “The quasi-isometry classification of lattices in semisimple Lie groups”, Math.
     Res. Letters 4 (1997) 705–718.
[61] T. Farrell and L. Jones, “Topological rigidity for compact non-positively curved man-
     ifolds”, in “Differential geometry, Los Angeles 1990”, Proc. Sympos. Pure Math. 54,
     1993, 224–274
[62] S.M. Gersten “Subgroups of word hyperbolic groups in dimension 2”, J. London
     Math. Soc. 54 (1996) 261–283.
[63] S.M. Gersten and H. Short “Rational subgroups of biautomatic groups”, Ann. Math.
     134 (1991) 125–158.
[64] E. Ghys and P. de la Harpe (editors) “Sur les groupes hyperboliques d’après Mikhael
     Gromov”, Prog. in Math. 83 Birkäuser, Boston 1990.


                                           173
[65] R. Grigorchuik “On the system of defining relations and the Schur multiplier of
     periodic groups generated by finite automata”, in Proceedings of Groups St Andrews
     1997 in Bath, eds. C.M. Campbell, E.F. Robertson, N. Ruskuc & G.C. Smith,
     Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1998.
[66] D. Gromoll and J. Wolf, “Some relations between the metric structure and the al-
     gebraic structure of the fundamental group in manifolds of non-positive curvature”,
     Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 77 (1971) 545–552.
[67] M. Gromov, “Infinite groups as geometric objects”, Proc. ICM, Warsaw 1983 PWN,
     Warsaw 1984, 385–392
[68] M. Gromov, “Hyperbolic groups”, in Essays in group theory, ed. S. M. Gersten,
     Springer Verlag, MSRI 8 (1987) 75–263.
[69] M. Gromov, “Asymptotic invariants of infinite groups”, in Geometric Group Theory
     LMS Lecture Notes, 182 eds. G. A. Niblo and M. A. Roller, Cambridge Univ. Press
     1993.
[70] M. Gromov, “Groups of polynomial growth and expanding maps”, Publ. Math.
     I.H.E.S. 53 (1981) 53-78.
[71] A. Haefliger “Complexes of groups and orbihedra” in “Group theory from a geometric
     viewpoint” eds. E. Ghys, A. Haefliger, A. Verjovsy Proc. ICTP Trieste, World
     Scientific, Singapore (1991) 504–540.
[72] A. Haefliger, “Extension of complexes of groups”, Ann. Inst. Fourier 42 (1992) 275–
     311.
[73] F. Haglund “Les polyèdres de Gromov”, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. 1 Math 313
     (1991) 603–606.
[74] J. Howie, “On pairs of 2-complexes and systems of equations over groups”, J. Reine
     Angew. Math. 324 (1981) 165–174.
[75] W. Jaco and P. Shalen, “Seifert fibered spaces in 3-manifolds”, Memoirs Amer.
     Math. Soc. 220 (1979).
[76] K. Johannson, Homotopy equivalence of 3-manifolds with boundaries, Springer Ver-
     lag, LN 761, Berlin-Heidelberg- New York.
[77] E. R. van Kampen, “On some lemmas in the theory of groups”, Amer. J. Math. 55
     (1933) 268–273.
[78] M. Kapovich and B. Leeb, “Actions of discrete groups on non-positively curved
     spaces”, Math. Ann. 306 (1996) 341–352.
[79] H. B. Lawson and S. T. Yau, “Compact manifolds of nonpositive curvature”, J.
     Differential Geom. 7 (1972) 211–228.
[80] B. Leeb “3-manifolds with(out) metrics of non-positive curvature”, Ph.D. thesis,
     University of Maryland, 1993.
[81] R. C. Lyndon and P. E. Schupp, “Combinatorial group theory”, Springer Verlag,
     Berlin, Heidelberg, New York 1977.
[82] I. G. Lysenok, “On some algorithmic properties of hyperbolic groups”, Math. USSR
     Izv. 35 (1990) 145–163.
[83] G. A. Margulis, Discrete subgroups of semisimple Lie groups, Ergeb. Math. 17
     Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York 1991.
[84] A. A. Markov, “Insolubility of the problem of homeomorphy”, in Proc. ICM Cam-
     bridge (1958) 300-306. Cambridge University Press, 1960.
[85] D. Meier, “Non-Hopfian groups” J. London Math. Soc.(2) 26 (1982) 265–270.
[86] C.F. Miller III, “Decision problems for groups: survey and reflections” in Algorithms
     and Classification in Combinatorial Group Theory, eds. G Baumslag and C. F. Miller
     III, MSRI Publ. 23, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, New York, Heidelberg 1992, 1–59.
[87] J. Milnor “A note on curvature and the fundamental group”, J. Differential Geom.
     2 (1968) 1–7.


                                          174
 [88] L. Mosher “Geometry of cubulated 3-manifolds”, Topology 34 (1995) 789–814.
 [89] G. Moussong “ Hyperbolic Coxeter groups”, Ph.D Thesis, The Ohio State University,
      1988.
 [90] A. Yu. Ol’shanskii “Hyperbolicity of groups with subquadratic isoperimetric inequal-
      ities”, Internat. J. Algebra Comput. 1 (1991) 281–289.
 [91] A. Yu. Ol’shanskii “Almost every group is hyperbolic”, Intl. J. Alg. Comp. 2 (1992)
      1–17.
 [92] A. Yu. Ol’shanskii “SQ-universality of hyperbolic groups”, Mat. Sb. 186 (1995)
      119-132.
 [93] P. Pansu “Croissance des boules et des géodesiques fermées dans les nilvariétés”,
      Ergodic Theory Dynamical Systems 3 (1983) 415-445.
 [94] C. D. Papakiakopolous, “On Dehn’s lemma and the asphericity of knots” Ann. of
      Math. 66 (1957) 1–26.
 [95] P. Papasoglou “On the sub-quadratic isoperimetric inequality” in Geometric group
      theory, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin-New York, 1995, 149–158.
 [96] F. Paulin, “Construction of hyperbolic groups via hyperbolization of polyhedra” in
      Group theory from a geometric viewpoint, eds. E. Ghys, A. Haefliger, A. Verjovsy
      Proc. ICTP Trieste, World Scientific, Singapore 1991, 313–373.
 [97] H. Poincaré, “Analysis Situs”, J. d’Ecole poly. Norm. 1 (1895) 1–121.
 [98] H. Poincaré, “Cinquième complement à l’analysis situs”, Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo
      18 (1904) 45–110.
 [99] E. Rips, “Subgroups of small cancellation groups Bull. London Math. Soc. 14
      (1982) 45–47.
[100] M. Sageev, “Ends of group pairs and non-positively curved cube complexes”, Proc.
      London Math. Soc. 71 (1995) 585-617.
[101] V. Schroeder, “Codimension one tori in manifolds of non-positive curvature”, Geom.
      Dedicata 33 (1990) 251–263.
[102] V. Schroeder, “A cusp closing theorem”, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 106 (1989)
      797–802.
[103] G. P. Scott, “Compact submanifolds of 3-manifolds”, J. London Math. Soc. 7 (1973)
      246–250.
[104] Z. Sela “The isomorphism problem for hyperbolic groups I”, Ann. of Math.(2) 141
      (1995) 217–283.
[105] J-P. Serre, Trees, Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York 1980. Translation
      by J. Stillwell of “Arbres, Amalgames, SL2 ”, Astérisque 46 (1977).
[106] H. B. Short (editor) “Notes on negatively curved groups Group theory from a geo-
      metrical viewpoint” Eds. E. Ghys, A. Haefliger, A. Verjovsky, Proc. ICTP Trieste,
      World Scientific, Singapore (1991) 3–64.
[107] H. B. Short, “Groups and combings”, Preprint, ENS Lyon, 1990.
[108] J.R. Stallings, “Triangles of groups” in Group theory from a geometrical viewpoint,
      eds E. Ghys, A. Haefliger, A. Verjovsky Proc. ICTP Trieste, World Scientific, Sin-
      gapore (1991) 491–503.
[109] J.R. Stallings, “A finitely presented group whose 3-dimensional integral homology is
      not finitely generated”, Amer. J. Math. 85 (1963) 541–543.
[110] A.S. Švarc, “Volume invariants of coverings”, Dokl. Ak. Nauk. 105 (1955) 32-34.
[111] W. P. Thurston, “The geometry and topology of 3-manifolds”, Lecture notes, Prince-
      ton University, 1980.
[112] W. P. Thurston, “Three dimensional manifolds, Kleinian groups and hyperbolic ge-
      ometry”, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 6 (1982) 357-381.
[113] J. Tits, “On buildings and their Applications”, in Proc. ICM, Vancouver 1974 1
      Canad. Math. Congress, Montreal 1975 209–220.


                                           175
[114] C.M. Weinbaum “The word and conjugacy problem for the knot group of any tame
      prime alternating knot”, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 22 (1971) 22–26.
[115] D.T. Wise Nonpositively curved squared complexes, aperiodic tilings, and non-resid-
      ually finite groups, Ph.D Thesis, Princeton Univ., 1996.
[116] D.T. Wise, “Incoherent negatively curved groups”, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 126
      (1998) 957–964.
[117] D.T. Wise, “An automatic group that is not Hopfian”, J. Algebra 180 (1996) 845–
      847.
[118] J.A. Wolf, Spaces of constant curvature, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1967.




                                          176
