                                                   MELLIN TRANSFORMS, TRANSFINITE DIAMETER AND RATIONAL
                                                               APPROXIMATIONS OF INTEGRALS


                                                                                              FRANCIS BROWN




                                                    Abstract. We establish a higher-dimensional irrationality criterion for periods which are presented as
                                                    Mellin integrals depending on many parameters. The criterion is stated as an upper bound on the multi-
                                                    variate transfinite diameter of the image of the domain of integration under the Mellin arguments. Most
                                                    of the paper is devoted to studying notions of transfinite diameter relative to very general multivariate




arXiv:2604.20741v1 [math.NT] 22 Apr 2026
                                                    Vandermonde matrices. As a proof of principle, we illustrate how this approach works with detailed
                                                    computations in the case of a 5-parameter family of integrals for ζp2q on M0,5 , the moduli space of
                                                    curves of genus 0 with 5 marked points. This yields a ‘higher-dimensional’ proof of the irrationality of
                                                    ζp2q, based on an upper bound for a certain kind of transfinite diameter associated to M0,5 .


                                                                                             1. Introduction
                                              Following Apéry and Beukers, many known irrationality proofs of periods, such as ζp2q or ζp3q, involve
                                           constructing families of linear forms which provide rational approximations to the periods in question.
                                           These linear forms commonly arise from integrals which depend on a large number of additional param-
                                           eters, typically greater than the dimension of the integral, which generate a huge family of additional
                                           linear forms. However, the existing criteria for irrationality make no use of these linear forms and their
                                           underlying geometric structure. In this note we introduce a ‘multi-parameter’ irrationality criterion
                                           which does exploit them. Our guiding principle is that one should try to replace ad hoc diophantine
                                           arguments with general constructions in algebraic geometry.
                                              A motivating question for this investigation was the following: does there exist a method for proving
                                           the irrationality of period integrals which improves as their dimension increases? All known constructions
                                           do the exact opposite, and become significantly worse with increasing dimension (or weight). Indeed the
                                           quality of known approximations to periods of higher weight, e.g., for the odd zeta values ζp2n ` 1q,
                                           rapidly become very poor indeed as n increases. As long as this situation persists, proving irrationality
                                           results for periods by this method is a game where the goalposts are forever moving out of reach.
                                           1.1. Main example. A fascinating geometric feature of period integrals which becomes richer with
                                           increasing dimension is the existence of additional parameters. To illustrate, consider the integrals:
                                                                                                 xh p1 ´ xqi y k p1 ´ yqj dxdy
                                                                                         ż
                                           (1.1)                      Iph, i, j, k, ℓq “
                                                                                          r0,1s2     p1 ´ xyqi`j´ℓ       1 ´ xy
                                           which depend on five integer parameters h, i, j, k, ℓ ě 0. They are canonically associated to M0,5 and one
                                           shows that Iph, i, j, k, ℓq is a linear form in Zζp2q ` Q. The denominator of Iph, i, j, k, lq is the smallest
                                           positive integer D such that DIph, i, j, k, ℓq P Zζp2q`Z. The Apéry family is obtained from the ‘diagonal’
                                                                                      Ipn, n, n, n, nq “ an ζp2q ` bn ,
                                           where an , Dn bn P Z. Since the integrals on the left-hand side tend to zero exponentially fast, and the
                                           denominators Dn are not too large, the approximation ζp2q „ ´bn {an is sufficient to prove that ζp2q R Q.
                                              Rhin and Viola’s remarkable method [RV96, RV01], based on earlier work by Hata and others, selects
                                           a set of fixed integers a1 , . . . , a5 ą 0 to construct a better family Ipa1 n, a2 n, . . . , a5 nq. Their preferred
                                           choice is Ip12n, 12n, 14n, 14n, 13nq, whose arguments form a line which lies very close to the diagonal.
                                           The key point is that changing the direction of this line away from the diagonal will typically compromise
                                           the asymptotic behavior of the integrals, but lead to a significant improvement of their denominators.
                                           The mechanism for this is the so-called ‘group method’, introduced in loc. cit., which exploits a rich
                                           group of symmetries satisfied by the full 5-parameter family of integrals to prove that specific primes
                                           do not divide the denominators of certain integrals Iph, i, j, k, ℓq. This group structure seems to exist in

                                              Date: April 23, 2026.
                                              Key words and phrases. Mellin Periods, Irrationality proofs, Transfinite Diameter, Vandermonde determinants, Zeta
                                           values.
                                                                                                       1
quite some generality but does not yet have a satisfying explanation from the point of view of algebraic
geometry. Quite how to optimise the choice of the parameters pa1 , . . . , a5 q is something of an art which
is not fully disclosed in the existing literature.
   Whilst the group method, which involves selecting a single line of integrals, can lead to spectacular
improvements in the irrationality measure, it still does not fully exploit the whole 5-dimensional space of
parameters. Furthermore, there is a trade-off between the quality of the denominators of the integrals,
and the quality of their asymptotics. Indeed, improving the denominators typically leads to worse
asymptotics, and improving the asymptotics to poorer denominator bounds.
   These observations were the starting point for the present investigation, as part of a broader study of
the fascinating properties of Mellin periods and their associated motives.

1.2. Mellin periods and the geometry of numbers. We consider an algebraic Mellin integral
                                               ż
(1.2)                     Ips1 , . . . , sr q “ f1s1 . . . frsr ω Repsi q ě 0
                                                 σ

on a smooth affine variety X of dimension d, where ω is a regular differential d form on X, σ Ă XpCq is
a relative d-chain with boundary contained in the points of a divisor Y Ă X, and f1 , . . . , fr : X Ñ A1
are regular functions on X. We assume that X, Y, f1 , . . . , fr are all defined over Q.
   The finite-dimensionality of algebraic de Rham cohomology implies that there exists a finite set of
periods ξ1 , . . . , ξm such that, for every set of integers n1 , . . . , nr ě 0
(1.3)                               Ipn1 , . . . , nr q P Qξ1 ` . . . ` Qξm .
By clearing the denominator Dn P Z, where n “ pn1 , . . . , nr q we have
                                       Dn Ipnq P Zξ1 ` . . . ` Zξm .
Thus a Mellin integral (1.2) is a machine for constructing many linear forms in periods. When the fi
vanish along the boundary of the domain of integration, these linear forms will typically be small. See
[Bro16] for a systematic study when X is a (partial compactification of the) moduli space of curves of
genus 0 with marked points, and ξi are multiple zeta values. In all our examples, r is at least as large
as the dimension d. For ζp2q, which will be our main running example, there are r “ 5 parameters, and
m “ 2 periods, namely ξ1 “ ζp2q and ξ2 “ 1.

   How to make use of the plethora of linear forms (1.3)? Consider all such linear forms where the ni
are bounded above by a fixed integer M . We wish to find integers cn P Z so that the linear combination
                                 ÿ
                                      cn Dn Ipnq P Zξ1 ` . . . ` Zξm
                                 n:ni ďM

is as small as possible, and, importantly, non-zero (this cannot be guaranteed unless the ‘motivic’ versions
[Bro17] of the ξi are linearly independent, which we shall always assume). The geometry of numbers
already provides a method for tackling this problem.

Theorem 1.1. (Minkowski) Let A P Mnˆn pRq be a matrix with detpAq ‰ 0. Then there exists an integer
vector c “ pc1 , . . . , cn q P Zn such that
                                     ˇ           ˇ
                                     ˇÿn         ˇ             1
                                 0ăˇ      Aij cj ˇ ď | detpAq| n for some 1 ď i ď n .
                                     ˇ           ˇ
                                     ˇj“1        ˇ

    This theorem suggests a very natural approach for generating small linear forms in the periods
ξ1 , . . . , ξr . We construct a matrix Qσ whose entries are integrals Ipnq for ni ď M , in such a way
that its determinant is non-zero. We will mostly study a particular construction where Qσ is positive-
definite, but there are other possibilities which exploit the existence of Picard-Fuchs recurrence relations
(or contiguity relations) between the Ipnq. In our situation, the determinant of Qσ can be bounded
above by using a greatly generalized version of the transfinite diameter, which measures the size of the
image of the domain of integration σ under the map f “ pf1 , . . . , fr q (see below).
    After clearing denominators, we obtain a matrix Aσij which satisfies

                                       Aσ “ Ap1q ξ1 ` . . . ` Apmq ξm
                                                       2
where Apiq are matrices with integer entries1. Minkowski’s theorem may then be applied to the matrix
Aσ to deduce the existence of a non-vanishing linear form.
   The denominators occuring in the entries of the matrix Qσ are related to the orders of the poles of the
integral I along some suitable compactification of X. Whilst a general theorem has not currently been
worked out, we expect that denominator bounds can systematically be obtained using overconvergent
p-adic de Rham cohomology. Our examples suggest, furthermore, that denominator bounds can be
significantly improved by exploiting congruences in algebraic de Rham cohomology.
   A key point is that the multi-parameter approach described above enables one to decouple the problem
of optimising the denominators from the asymptotics of integrals. In fact, examples suggest that a useful
strategy is to fill the input matrix Qσ with integrals with small denominators, irrespective of whether
they individually give good approximations or not. Minkowski’s theorem will do the work of extracting
a linear combination of these integrals which is small in absolute value.
Remark 1.2. In the case when there is a single parameter r “ 1, our method is an effective version of
the determinant criterion of Zudilin [Zud17], who gave examples of periods (logarithms) to show that
significant improvements can already be obtained in a one-dimensional setting. This follows from the
fact that the transfinite diameter of the unit interval r0, 1s is equal to 41 , which is significantly smaller
than 1{e „ 0.3678 ¨ ¨ ¨ . However, he remarks that there are no further gains to be made as the dimension
increases, since the transfinite diameter of an N -dimensional cube r0, 1sN is no smaller.
   One purpose of this note was to test if this conclusion is indeed the case, since it stands to reason that
the larger the space of available linear forms, the better the approximations one might hope to obtain.
Indeed we find that his remark is unduly pessimistic, for at least three reasons. Firstly, our criterion
depends on the transfinite diameter of the region f pσq, which is typically much smaller than the unit
cube. Secondly, the notion of transfinite diameter which is involved is somewhat different from the ones
usually found in the literature. Finally, and most importantly, experiments suggest that the denominator
estimates can be dramatically improved when one takes into account more parameters.
1.3. Contents and results. This paper has two main strands. The first is to set up a framework for
constructing matrices Qσ associated to Mellin integrals and bounding their determinant in terms of a
suitable generalisation of the notion of transfinite diameter. We believe that this underlies an interesting
and very general algebraic structure associated to a family of algebraic Mellin transforms (1.2).
   The second is to describe some experimental computations exploring the integrals (1.1) as a ‘proof
of principle’. The main achievement of this paper is that we are able to predict quite accurately the
asymptotics of the matrix determinants using our general theory. Whilst there is (intentionally!) no
possible new irrationality result to be gained from such an example, it enables us to probe the hypothesis
that the method described here improves as more parameters are brought into play, and suggests that
more substantial improvements might be gained from considering period integrals in higher dimension.

1.3.1. Quadratic forms Qσ and Vandermonde determinants. We now describe a simple construction of
matrices Qσ . Suppose we are given a finite sequence
(1.4)                                                f1 , f2 , . . . , fN
of linearly independent polynomials fi in f1 , . . . , fr on X. Consider the symmetric matrix:
                            ˆż          ˙
                        σ
                      Q “       fi fj ω                  P MN ˆN pQξ1 ` . . . ` Qξm q .
                                    σ         1ďi,jďN

Its entries are linear combinations of the integrals (1.3). The determinant of Qσ only depends on the
free Z-module MN “ ‘N    i“1 Zfi . Consider

                                    tMN pσq “       sup         |detpfi pzj qq1ďi,jďN | .
                                                z1 ,...,zN Pσ

The right-hand side involves a generalised Vandermonde determinant associated to the module MN , and
one has the following upper bound
                                                              2
                                        |detpQσ q| ď ptMN pσqq ,
for all sufficiently large N . Furthermore, under some mild assumptions on the defining data f1 , . . . , fr , ω, σ
we may show that the matrix Qσ is positive-definite and hence has non-vanishing determinant.

   1Such matrix linear forms in periods merit investigation in their own right: here we consider them to be ‘small’ when
detpAσ q is small, but there are other ways to measure the size of a matrix linear form in ξ1 , . . . , ξm
                                                                3
  Let Dℓ , Dr P MN ˆN pQq such that Aσ “ Dℓ Qσ Dr has entries which are integer coefficients in the ξi ,
and denote the ‘denominator’ of this data by δMN “ det |Dℓ Dr |. Then Minkowski’s theorem, applied to
Aσ , guarantees the existence of an integer linear form in ξi satisfying
                                                             ´               ¯ N1
                                                                         2
                       0 ă |n1 ξ1 ` . . . ` nm ξm | ă          ptMN pσqq δMN      .

See theorem 7.2. This gives the following multi-parameter irrationality criterion:
Criterion 1.3. Suppose that m “ 2 and ξ1 “ 1, ξ2 “ ξ (or m ą 2, ξ1 “ 1, and each ξi P Qrξs, for i ą 1).
Suppose that there exist sequences (1.4) of arbitrary length N ąą 0 such that
                                              tMN pσq2 δMN Ñ 0 ,
where δMN is defined relative to some choice of matrices Dℓ , Dr as above. Then ξ is irrational.
   This criterion is suited to performing numerical experiments. The reader may wish to turn directly
to §9 for some detailed computations in the case of the integrals (1.1), where we consider the cases with
r “ 1, r “ 2 and finally the full set of r “ 5 parameters. Experiments suggest, as expected, that the
quality of the approximations can improve as the number of parameters increases.
   In order to make use of the previous criterion, one needs to have good control over the quantity
tMN pσq, which is a precursor to the transfinite diameter and is discussed below. Most of the work
presented here is devoting to studying it, and our results are in close agreement with the numerical data
presented in §9. The denominator δMN , in this case, is related to a possible notion of ‘p-adic transfinite
diameter’ (see §8.2.1, Remark 9.7).

1.3.2. Supremal transfinite diameter. The data of a family of Mellin integrals can be encoded by a
morphism of varieties
                                           f : X ÝÑ Ar
where f “ pf1 , . . . , fr q. We let Vf Ă Ar denote the Zariski-closure of its image. It is an affine scheme
which we call the anciliary image variety.
   In order to better understand the quantities tMN pσq, we shall replace the data of the functions (1.4)
with an infinite rank Z-module N Ă OpAr q – Zrx1 , . . . , xr s equipped with an increasing filtration
Nn Ă N of submodules of finite rank Nn “ rank Nn . We assume that the Z-module M “ f ˚ N is free,
which amounts to the independence of (1.4). The Mellin transforms define a symmetric bilinear pairing
                                   N bZ N       ÝÑ    R
                                                      ż
                                          1
                                    xm, m y      “          f ˚ pmqf ˚ pm1 q ω .
                                                        σ

Under some mild assumptions it is non-degenerate, and even positive-definite. If the module Nn has
          ÀNn
basis Nn “ i“1 mi Z then the generalised Vandermonde matrix
                                                VNn “ pmi pzj qq
is well-defined up to permutations of rows and columns. The absolute value of its determinant is
the function on pCr qNn given by | det VNn pzq| “ | det Nn |. Given a region τ Ă Cr , we set tNn “
supzPτ Nn | det VNn pzq| . Finally we define the supremal transfinite diameter to be
                                                                         1{eN
(1.5)                               SupN ,e pτ q “ lim sup ptNn pτ qq       n

                                                       n

where eN
       n are appropriately chosen integers which we call exponents. For special cases of modules N , and
compact τ , the supremal transfinite diameter reduces to various notions of higher-dimensional transfinite
diameter which have been studied in the literature. Much previous work has been concerned with the
existence of the limits [Zah75], but here we only need an upper bound, which is why it is enough to
take a limit supremum, which exists unconditionally. Unfortunately, the higher-dimensional transfinite
diameters are only known for some quite limited sets τ P Cr , even for r “ 2, but by leveraging known
computations we can deduce fairly accurate bounds for the family (1.1). A related notion of transfinite
diameter on algebraic varieties was recently studied in [Ma‘11, CM17].
   The quantity SupN ,e pτ q measures, in a certain sense, both the size and shape of the region τ . A crude
rule of thumb is that it is typically proportional to the volume of τ raised to some power which depends
on the dimension of τ and on the exponents e.
                                                       4
  If we define a limit of denominators (having fixed a choice of period representatives ξ1 , . . . , ξm ) by
                                                                    1{eN
(1.6)                                        δN ,e “ lim sup δNn n
                                                             n
then the irrationality criterion 1.3, may be rephrased, after taking the limit, as
Criterion 1.4. SupN ,e pf pσqq2 δN ,e ă 1
   In other words, the size of the image of the integration domain f pσq inside the anciliary image variety
Vf pCq, as measured by the module of functions N , should not be too large relative to denominators.
1.4. Intuitive example. In practice, the criterion (1.4) amounts to establishing an upper bound on
the transfinite diameter of f pσq. In order to gain some intuition for the precise relationship, consider a
family of examples where m “ 2, i.e., a family of Mellin integrals over Q
                                                     ż
                                Ipn1 , . . . , nr q “ f1n1 . . . frnr ω P Q ` Qξ
                                                     σ
where ω is positive on σ, f pσq Ă Cr is Zariski-dense, and
(1.7)                                  dw
                                        n1 ,...,nr Ipn1 , . . . , nr q P Z ` Zξ

for some ‘weight’ w ě 0, where dn1 ,...,nr “ max1ďiďr tlcmt1, . . . , ni uu. Alternatively, one can assume
m ą 2 and that every ξi for i ą 2 is a polynomial in ξ. This kind of denominator bound is fairly typical,
but not universally applicable since the precise denominators vary from situation to situation.
   In view of the bound (1.7), we consider the matrix Qσ associated to the ‘rectangular’ module
                                                à
                                       Nn “          xn1 1 . . . xnr r Z .
                                                 0ďni ďn

In other words, we form a symmetric matrix whose entries consists of integrals Ipn1 , . . . , nr q with argu-
ments in the range 0 ď ni ď 2n. The exponents are asymptotically eN    r r`1
                                                                  n „ 2n     . The supremal transfinite
              rec
diameter Sup is computed using the determinant of a ‘rectangular’ multivariable Vandermonde matrix.
   The denominator computed in lemma 7.6 and the irrationality criterion 1.4 reduces via (7.4) to
                                                   ˆ          ˙
                                      rec            w 2r ` 1
(1.8)                             Sup pf pσqq exp               ă1
                                                     r r`1
which is implied by the sufficient condition Suprec pf pσqq expp 2w
                                                                  r q ă 1. In the case when r “ 1, Sup
                                                                                                       rec

equals the classical 1-dimensional transfinite diameter tr and we retrieve the criterion of Zudilin:
                                                        ˆ      ˙
                                                            3
                                        trpf pσqq ă exp ´ w .
                                                            2
As we increase the number of parameters r, the threshold for irrationality in (1.8) improves. For instance,
when r “ w, we obtain the criterion for irrationality
                                                      ˆ             ˙
                                                                1
                                 Suprec pf pσqq ă exp ´2 `             .
                                                              w`1
A universal sufficient condition is thus 4 Suprec pf pσqq ă 4 exp p´2q “ 0.5413 . . . Typically f pσq Ă r0, 1sr
is contained in the unit square, which satisfies Suprec pr0, 1sr q “ 14 . So for the criterion to apply when
r “ w, Suprec pf pσqq needs to be (very roughly) less than half that of the unit square.
Example 1.5. Consider the ζp2q integrals (1.1), for which w “ 2 and m “ 2. In §9 we study in some
detail the two-parameter subfamily Ipn2 , n1 , n2 , n1 , n2 q which amounts to setting r “ 2 and letting
                                            yp1 ´ xq
                                     f1 “                ,       f2 “ xp1 ´ yq .
                                             1 ´ xy
All conditions assumed above hold. The map f “ pf1 , f2 q maps the region r0, 1s2 to a subset of the unit
square which lies below the hyperbola tpx, yq : xy “ 0.091u. Criterion (1.8) requires that
                                 4 Suprec pf pσqq ă 4 expp´5{3q “ 0.7555 . . .
Using the techniques developed in this paper, we can prove that Suprec pf pσqq „ 0.14 to an accuracy of
about ˘0.01, which is amply suffficient for a ‘2-dimensional’ irrationality proof for ζp2q. In this example,
however, we observe that the denominators for Qσ are considerably smaller than the rather crude bounds
used above, and a much weaker inequality is sufficient in practice to establish irrationality (for instance,
we can comfortably replace 0.7555 . . . with 0.81 in the above).
                                                           5
1.5. Plan and comments. In §2.1, we review some background on algebraic Mellin integrals, introduce
the anciliary image variety and illustrate with some simple examples. In §3 we define positive-definite
matrices Qσ and bound their determinants. In §4 we define a very general notion of Vandermonde de-
terminant associated to a module, and in §5 we define the corresponding notion of supremal transfinite
diameter. The literature is unfortunately lacking effective techniques for estimating the transfinite di-
ameter as far as we are aware, but in this section we introduce some methods which give some upper
bounds for tensor products and direct sums of modules, which are in turn applied in §6 to a 2-dimensional
region bounded by the unit cube and a hyperbola. In §7 we derive in some more detail the irrationality
criterion outlined in the introduction and §8 discusses generalisations, p-adic variants and so on. The
reader may wish to turn immediately to §9 where the family of integrals for ζp2q are studied in several
different ways. These examples are not intended to be anything more than a proof of principle; we
did not attempt to optimise the choices for the modules N . Indeed it might be interesting to consider
modules whose monomial bases in r variables are centered around on one or more of the Rhin-Viola
‘lines’ mentioned earlier.
    There are many other families of integrals for which it would be interesting to study the multi-
parameter irrationality criterion introduced here. Likewise, it would be very interesting to generalise the
irrationality criterion 1.4 to a linear independence criterion, by bounding the numerators in the linear
forms obtained from Minkowski’s theorem. This will be postponed to another day.

1.6. Acknowledgements. This project has received funding from the European Research Council
(ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon Europe programme (grant agreement No. 101167287).
For the purpose of Open Access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright licence to any Author
Accepted Manuscript (AAM) version arising from this submission. Many thanks to Wadim Zudilin for
discussions on related topics and Shachar Weinbaum for comments.

                         2. Mellin transforms and anciliary image variety
   We briefly review some properties of Mellin transforms before introducing the anciliary image variety.

2.1. Algebraic Mellin integrals. Let X be an affine algebraic variety over Q equipped with a mor-
phism to affine space of dimension r ą 0:
(2.1)                                  f : X ÝÑ Ar “ Spec Qrx1 , . . . , xr s .
Denote the coordinates of f by fi “ xi ˝ f , for 1 ď i ď r, so that f “ pf1 , . . . , fr q. Let ω P Ωd pXq (the
global sections of the sheaf of regular d-forms) be a regular differential form of degree d and σ Ă XpCq
a relative d-chain whose boundary is contained in the complex points of a divisor Y Ă X, which we can
assume to be normal crossing. The integral
                                                           ż
(2.2)                                 Ips1 , . . . , sr q “ f1s1 . . . frsr ω
                                                                σ
defines a function of s1 , . . . , sr which is holomorphic for Repsi q ě 0 and extends meromorphically to Cr .
In some examples, the form ω may additionally have poles along the boundary of σ. One can reduce to
the previous situation by performing blow-ups to resolve singularities locally along the boundary of σ.

2.1.1. Periods. For non-negative integer values of si , the integrals Ipn1 , . . . , nr q are periods of H d pX, Y q.
In particular, there exist m regular differential forms ω1 , . . . , ωm P Ωd pXq, whose relative de Rham
                                         d
cohomology classes are independent in HdR   pX, Y q such that for all n “ pn1 , . . . , nr q non-negative integers
there exist unique rational numbers a1 pnq, . . . , am pnq with:
(2.3)               rf1n1 . . . frnr ωs “ a1 pnqrω1 s ` . . . ` am pnqrωm s       P     d
                                                                                       HdR pX, Y q .
                                               d
Note that m may be strictly smaller than dimQ HdR pX, Y q. If we denote by
                                         ż
                                    ξi “ ωi for 1 ď i ď m
                                                  σ
                          n
then ξi is a period of H pX, Y q since Bσ Ă Y pCq. We deduce the
Lemma 2.1. The Mellin integral (2.2) at integer values:
                        Ipn1 , . . . , nr q “ a1 pnqξ1 ` . . . ` am pnqξm     P   Qrξ1 , . . . , ξm s
                                                                     n
is a Q-linear form in finitely many periods ξ1 , . . . , ξm of H pX, Y q.
                                                            6
2.1.2. Holonomicity. It is well-known that, as we vary ni , the rational numbers (2.3) satisfy holonomic
recurrence equations (in several variables) (e.g., [LS91]). On a more basic level, the cohomology classes
rf1n1 . . . frnr ωs satisfy linear relations with coefficients which are polynomials in the ni , akin to integration-
by-parts identities. From a different perspective, for every 1 ď i ď r, there is a shift operator τi which
represents the action of multiplication by fi on cohomology classes of degree d in the twisted algebraic de
Rham cohomology of X z V pf1 . . . fr q relative to Y , with coefficients in the algebraic vector bundle with
                                             řr
connection pOX , ∇q, where ∇ “ d ` i“1 si df         fi . In a suitable basis, these may represented by contiguity
                                                       i

                                              σ
matrices, from which the matrices Q may often be derived. We will not exploit this structure in the
present work, but provide some details in the case of the integrals (1.1) in an Appendix.
2.2. Anciliary image variety. Let pX, f q be as above. An important role is played by what we shall
call the anciliary image variety associated to the data of a Mellin transform.
Definition 2.2. Let Vf Ă Ar denote the Zariski closure of f pXq. By abuse, we shall simply write
f : X Ñ Vf for the natural map through which (2.1) factorises.
   The affine coordinate ring of Vf is the quotient Qrf1 , . . . , fr s{I, where I is the ideal generated by the
algebraic relations satisfied by the functions fi . By abuse of notation, we write
(2.4)                                             f pσq Ă Vf pCq .
Two key quantities are the number of parameters r, and the anciliary dimension dim Vf ď dim X.
2.3. Some examples. We give two very basic examples to illustrate the role played by the number of
parameters and of the ramification locus of the map f : X Ñ Vf .
2.3.1. Rational numbers. Let X “ A1 , Y “ t0, 1u and σ “ r0, 1s. First let r “ 1, and let f : X Ñ A1
denote the map f “ xp1 ´ xq, where x is the coordinate on A1 . Set ω “ dx. Then the family of integrals
                                              ż1
                                                           n
                                      Ipnq “     pxp1 ´ xqq dx
                                                      0
are periods of H 1 pA1 , t0, 1uq – Q and are all rational. The anciliary image variety is Vf – A1 “
Spec Qrf s. The image f pσq Ă Vf pCq is the interval r0, 41 s, as the function f is maximised on the interval
r0, 1s at the point x “ 12 . The boundary points t0, 41 u of f pσq can be determined algebraically. To see
why, note that the critical locus of f is the vanishing locus of f 1 “ 1 ´ 2x. Thus the discriminant of f is
Discpf q “ t 14 u Ă Vf , and f : X Ñ Vf “ A1 is a double covering of affine spaces ramified at 14 . The locus
f pY q is the single point t0u Ă Vf .
   Now let r “ 2, and let f : X Ñ A2 denote the map f “ px, 1 ´ xq. Set ω “ dx. Then the following
family of integrals generalises the previous example:
                                                     ż1
                                       Ipn1 , n2 q “    xn1 p1 ´ xqn2 dx .
                                                          0
                        1
They are periods of HdR   pA1 , t0, 1uq – Q and are again all rational. The anciliary image variety Vf Ă A2
is defined by the locus x1 ` x2 “ 1 and is isomorphic to A1 . Then f : X Ñ Vf is an isomorphism and
the image of f pσq is simply the unit interval in Vf relative to the coordinate x1 .
2.3.2. A logarithm. Let X “ A1 zt´1u, Y “ t0, 1u and σ “ r0, 1s. First let r “ 1 and define f : X Ñ A1
by f “ xp1´xq            dx
        p1`xq . Let ω “ 1`x . The associated integrals
                                            ż1ˆ           ˙n
                                                 xp1 ´ xq      dx
                                    Ipnq “
                                             0    1 `  x     1 `x
are periods of H 1 pA1 zt´1u, t0, 1uq which is a Kummer extension of Qp´1q by Qp0q. It has two periods
ξ1 “ 1 and ξ2 “ log 2 and one may easily deduce that Ipnq P Q ` Z log 2 (the coefficient of ξ1 is an integer
since it is obtained
            ?        as a residue of the cohomology class of the integrand).
                                                                      ?      The function f 1 vanishes at
x “ ´1 ˘ 2, and the corresponding critical    ? values of f are 3 ˘ 2 2. Thus the boundary of f pσq is
contained in f pY q Y Discpf q “ t0u Y t3 ˘ 2 2u and indeed
                                                            ?
                                           f pσq “ r0, 3 ´ 2 2s .
                                                                 x
  Now let r “ 2, and let f : X Ñ A2 denote the map f “ p 1`x       , 1´x             dx
                                                                     1`x q. Set ω “ 1`x and σ “ r0, 1s.
Then the family of integrals                 ż 1 n1
                                                x p1 ´ xqn2 dx
                               Ipn1 , n2 q “            n1 `n2 px ` 1q
                                              0 px ` 1q
                                                              7
are periods of the same cohomology group as before. Thus Ipn1 , n2 q is a Q-linear combination of 1
and log 2. The anciliary image variety Vf Ă A2 is isomorphic to the affine line 2x1 ` x2 “ 1, and
f pY q “ tp0, 1q, p 12 , 0qu. The region f pσq is thus the interval r0, 12 s in the coordinate x1 .

                      3. Quadratic forms associated to Mellin transforms
3.1. A bilinear form. Let pX, f q be as in §2 and let Vf denote the anciliary image variety. Consider
the bilinear symmetric pairing
(3.1)                                  OpVf q bZ OpVf q       ÝÑ      R
                                                                      ż
                                                     gbh      ÞÑ          gh ω .
                                                                      σ
We may restrict this pairing to any free Z-module
                                                   M Ă OpVf q .
If M has finite rank with generators f1 , . . . , fN , then this pairing is represented by a symmetric matrix.
Definition 3.1. With these notations, define the N ˆ N symmetric matrix
                                       ż
                                σ
                             pQN qij “ fi fj ω      for 1 ď i, j ď N .
                                               σ

Note that the definition uses the multiplicative (ring) structure on OpVf q, but that we do not need to
assume that M is stable under multiplication.
   The determinant detpQσN q is well-defined, since changing the basis of M by P P GLN pZq results in
the matrix P T QσN P which has the same determinant.

3.2. Positive-definiteness. We make the following assumptions.
  (P1) The form ω is real and non-negative on σ.
  (P2) The generators f1 , . . . , fN of M are real-valued on σ.
  (P3) The domain σ is Zariski-dense in X.
In some circumstances these assumptions can be relaxed (see §8).
Lemma 3.2. Assume pP 1q-pP 3q. Then the bilinear pairing (3.1) is positive semi-definite. Let f1 , . . . , fN
be any elements in OpVf q. The following are equivalent:
   (i) The elements f1 , . . . , fN are linearly independent.
   (ii) The matrix QσN is positive-definite.
                                                                                         řN
Proof. Let v “ pv1 , . . . , vN qT P RN and define an element Pv P OpVf q bZ R by Pv “ i“1 vi fi . By
assumption (P1) and (P2), the integral
                                                        ż
                                                 Ipvq “ Pv2 ω ě 0
                                                         σ
is non-negative and vanishes if and only if Pv “ 0. Since
                                         ˜           ¸2
                                            N
                                            ÿ             N
                                                          ÿ
                                     2
                                   Pv “        vi fi    “   vi vj fi fj ,
                                               i“1            i,j“1

the integral Ipvq may be written as the quadratic form
                                                Ipvq “ v T QσN v .
By (P3), the restriction OpXq bQ R Ñ C 8 pσq is injective; the morphism f ˚ : OpVf q bQ R Ñ OpXq bQ R
is injective by definition. Suppose that f1 , . . . , fN are linearly independent. Then Pv vanishes on σ if and
only if vi “ 0 for all i “ 1, . . . , N . Equivalently, Ipvq “ 0 if and only if all vi “ 0 vanish, and hence QσN is
positive definite. The converse is trivial, since if f1 , . . . , fN are not independent, there exists a non-trivial
vector v such that Pv “ 0, and hence Ipvq “ v T QσN v “ 0.                                                        □

  In particular, when f1 , . . . , fN are a basis for a free Z-module M, the determinant detpQσN q only
depends on M and under assumptions pP 1q-pP 3q we have
                                                   detpQσN q ą 0 .
                                                          8
3.3. Vandermonde determinant associated to M. Let X N denote the N -fold product X ˆ . . . ˆ X
and let zi : X N Ñ X denote the projection onto the ith component. Let σ N Ă X N pCq denote the N -fold
product of the chains σ.
Definition 3.3. Let M – Zf1 ‘ . . . ‘ ZfN be a free Z-submodule of OpVf q of rank N . For any
z “ pz1 , . . . , zN q P X N pCq we consider an N ˆ N matrix
                                         VM pzq “ pfj pzi qq               1 ď i, j ď N ,
whose rows are indexed by the components of z and whose columns are indexed by f1 , . . . , fN , in some
chosen order. Its determinant is well-defined up to a sign and hence its square is well-defined (it is
independent of the choice of generators of M).
Remark 3.4. The natural map OpVf q ãÑ OpXq Ñ C 8 pσq, which restricts functions to σ, induces a map
ŹN                                                2
   OpVf q ÝÑ C 8 pσ N q. The function pdet VM pzqq P C 8 pσ N q is simply the square of the image of a
generator of detpMq – Z.
  The matrix VM pzq is a generalised Vandermonde matrix.
3.4. Calculation of the determinant of QσN . The N -fold external tensor product of ω on X N will
be denoted by
                             ω ⊠N “ ω ⊠ ω ⊠   . . . ⊠ ω P ΩdN pX N q .
                                    loooooooomoooooooon
                                                             N
Many thanks to a referee for pointing out that the following result goes back to the work of Heine and
Szëgo in the theory of orthogonal polynomials [And83].
Proposition 3.5. The determinant of QσN is given by the integral:
                                           ż
                                        1                   2
(3.2)                        det QσN “         pdet VM pzqq ω ⊠N .
                                       N ! σN
Proof. Let ΣN be the symmetric group on N elements and let ε : ΣN Ñ t1, ´1u be the sign representa-
tion. If h P OpXq we write hpzi q for zi˚ phq P OpX N q. Recall that OpVf q embeds in OpXq. Then:
                                   ˆż            ˙
                        σ
                   detpQN q “ det        fi fj ω
                                          σ             ij
                                   ÿ          ż                    ż                               ż
                             “           ετ        f1 fτ p1q ω ˆ           f2 fτ p2q ω ˆ . . . ˆ        fN fτ pN q ω
                                 τ PΣN         σ                       σ                           σ
                                   ÿ          ż
                             “           ετ         f1 pz1 q . . . fN pzN qfτ p1q pz1 q . . . fτ pN q pzN q ω ⊠N
                                 τ PΣN         σN
                                 ż
                             “          f1 pz1 q . . . fN pzN q det pfj pzi qqq ω ⊠N
                                   σN
                                        ˜               ¸
                                 ż         źN
                             “                 fi pzi q det VM pzq ω ⊠N .
                                   σN     i“1

Now consider the action of ΣN on X N by permuting factors. By functoriality of integration, we deduce
that for any π P ΣN ,
                                      ˜               ¸
                                 ż      źN
                     detpQσN q “           fi pzπpiq q π ˚ pdetpVM pzqqq π ˚ pω ⊠N q .
                                     π ´1 pσ N q     i“1
The action of π on the determinant is π ˚ pdetpVMN pzqqq “ εpπq detpVMN pzqq. Furthermore, the action
of π results in a simultaneous change in orientation of both the integration cycle σ N and the form ω ⊠N
which cancels out, i.e., there exists η P t1, ´1u such that π ˚ pω ⊠N q “ η ω ⊠N and π ´1 pσ N q “ η σ N .
Therefore, for any such π P ΣN one has the formula
                                     ż ˜        źN
                                                              ¸
                                σ
                          detpQN q “       εpπq    fi pzπpiq q detpVM pzqq ω ⊠N ,
                                              σN             i“1
and by summing over all elements π P ΣN we conclude that
                             ˜                    ¸
                      ż   ÿ         źN                                ż
                σ                                                ⊠N                                                     2
       N ! detpQN q “          εpπq    fi pzπpiq q detpVM pzqq ω    “                                       pdetpVM pzqqq ω ⊠N .
                       σN   πPΣN              i“1                                                      σN

                                                                   9
                                                                                                                    □
3.5. An upper bound for the determinant. Finally, the determinant of the matrix QσN may be
bounded above in the limit as N Ñ 8.
Definition 3.6. Let M Ă OpVf q be a free Z-module of rank N . Define
(3.3)                                      tM pσq “ sup |det VM pzq| .
                                                         zPσ N

It is well-defined since changing basis of M replaces VM pzq by P VM pzq P T for some P P GLN pZq, which
has determinant in t1, ´1u.
  Under the assumptions pP 1q, pP 2q, the right-hand side of (3.3) is the non-negative square root of the
Vandermonde determinant defined in remark 3.4.
                                                                                   ş
Corollary 3.7. If N “ rank M, is larger than a constant which depends only on σ ω, then
                                                            1               2
(3.4)                                       | det QσN | N ă tM pσq N .
                                                                                      1
If, furthermore, the assumptions pP 1q–pP 3q hold then 0 ă pdet QσN q N .
Proof. By equation (3.2) we have
                                                    ˇż      ˇ
                                                 1 ˇˇ       ˇ               2
                                 |det QσN | ď            ⊠N ˇ
                                                        ω ˇ sup |det VM pzq|
                                                 N ! σN
                                                    ˇ
                                                              zPσ N

and hence                                           ˇż ˇN
                                                 1 ˇˇ     ˇ                 2
                                 | det QσN | ď         ω ˇˇ sup |det VM pzq| .
                                                 N! σ
                                                    ˇ
                                                            zPσ N

                             1          ş
By Stirling’s formula, pN !q N exceeds | σ ω| for all sufficiently large N , hence
                                                    1                             2
                                      | det QσN | N ă sup |det VM pzq| N .
                                                            zPσ N

Finally, if pP 1q–pP 3q hold, QσN is positive definite by lemma 3.2.                                                □
3.6. Linear algebra interpretation. The following remark can be skipped, but may illuminate propo-
sition 3.5. The identity (3.2) is a manifestation of a completely general algebraic identity. Let V be a
free Z-module of rank N and embed
                                              ŹN
                                                 pSym2 V q Ă V b2N .
                                                                              ŹN
Let e1 , . . . , eN denote a Z-basis of V . The determinant detpV q “              V is the free Z-module of rank 1
generated by e1 ^ . . . ^ eN . We presume that the following lemma must be known.
                                                                           ŹN
Lemma 3.8. There is a natural inclusion ρ : Sym2 pdetpV qq ãÑ                    pSym2 V q which sends
                                                     ÿ
                          pe1 ^ . . . ^ eN q2 ÞÑ N !     ϵpσqpe1 .eαp1q q b . . . b peN .eαpN q q
                                                    αPΣN

where the symmetric group ΣN acts on pSym2 qbN by permuting factors.
   Note that the module Sym2 pdetpV qq is the Schur functor Sλ V where λ is the rectangular Young
diagram with 2 columns and N rows.
Proof. Via the inclusion detpV q ãÑ V bN we may identify
                                                ÿ
                             e 1 ^ . . . ^ eN “   ϵpσq eσp1q b . . . b eσpN q .
                                                        σPΣN

Thus the map ρ satisfies
             `                    ˘             ÿ
            ρ pe1 ^ . . . ^ eN q2   “                   ϵpσqϵpτ q peσp1q .eτ p1q q b . . . b peσpN q .eτ pN q q
                                            σ,τ PΣN
                                             ÿ          ÿ
                                       “                       ϵpαq peσp1q .eασp1q q b . . . b peσpN q .eασpN q q
                                            σPΣN αPΣN
                                                  ÿ
                                       “    N!            ϵpαq pe1 .eαp1q q b . . . b peN .eαpN q q
                                                 αPΣN
                                                                10
where in the first line we view V b2N “ V bN b V bN with the natural action of ΣN ˆ ΣN permuting
factors in each component, the notation a.b denotes the symmetrised tensor product a b b ` b b a, and
in the third line we write α “ τ σ ´1 and use the fact that ϵpαq “ ϵpσq´1 ϵpτ q “ ϵpσqϵpτ q.        □

   If we have a symmetric product x, y : Sym2 V Ñ R to some commutative ring R, then the N -fold
product defines a map pSym2 pV qqbN Ñ R. It may be applied to both sides to give the well-known
formula for a Gram determinant:
                        xe1 ^ . . . ^ eN , e1 ^ . . . ^ eN y “ N ! det pxei , ej yq1ďi,jďN .

                     4. Vandermonde determinants associated to modules
  Having already considered Vandermonde determinants on X N pCq, we now need to consider generalised
Vandermonde determinants on the anciliary image variety VfN pCq.

4.1. Vandermonde matrices. Let V “ Spec R be an affine algebraic variety of finite type over Q.
Definition 4.1. Let N be a free Z-submodule of R of rank N . Choose a Z-basis m1 , . . . , mN . Let
z “ pz1 , . . . zN q P V N pCq and define the matrix
(4.1)                                         VN pzq “ pmj pzi qq .
It is a generalised Vandermonde matrix, and its determinant only depends on the choice of generators
mi by a sign. In particular, the function
                                         |det VN pzq|         on   V N pCq
                                                                             ŹN
is well-defined and symmetric: it equals |det N |, where det N “                  N . For any set τ Ă V pCq, denote
its N -fold product by τ N Ă V N pCq, and define
(4.2)                                     tN pτ q “ sup |det VN pzq| .
                                                    zPτ N

It is a non-negative real number, or infinite.
   The number tN pτ q ě 0 is well-defined and is related to notions of transfinite diameter on an algebraic
variety. Clearly, if τ Ă τ 1 then tN pτ q ď tN pτ 1 q. The definition makes sense when N is not free, but in
this case the determinant function is identically zero, so we will usually assume that N is free.
   If M Ă N is a free submodule of rank equal to that of N then
(4.3)                                          tM pτ q “ tN pτ q C
where C is the cardinality of the finite torsion module N {M.

4.1.1. Morphisms. Consider a morphism f : V Ñ V 1 between two affine varieties of finite type over Q
where V “ Spec R, V 1 “ Spec R1 .
Definition 4.2. A free Z-module N Ă R1 will be called f -admissible if
                                                f ˚ : N ÝÑ f ˚ N
is injective, where f ˚ N , for want of a better notation, denotes the Z-module which is the image of N
under the morphism f ˚ : R1 Ñ R of Z-modules.
    For a free Z-module N of rank N , we denote a choice of basis by m1 , . . . , mN . Thus N is f -admissible
if and only if fi “ mi ˝ f , for 1 ď i ď N , are linearly independent functions on V pCq. When this holds,
(4.4)                                         tf ˚ N pτ q “ tN pf τ q .

4.1.2. Main example: the anciliary image variety. Recall that the anciliary image variety is
                                         Vf “ Spec pQrx1 , . . . , xr s{Iq
and the natural inclusion Vf Ă Ar is denoted by f ˚ . We will consider f -admissible free Z-modules
N Ă Zrx1 , . . . , xr s. Equation (4.4) trades the usually more complicated functions fi on the set σ Ă
XpCq, which in our applications is simply a hypercube, against simpler functions mi , which are typically
monomials in the coordinates x1 , . . . , xr , but on the region f σ Ă Vf pCq.

4.2. Classical examples of Vandermonde determinants. Let V – Ar and R “ Zrx1 , . . . , xr s.
                                                         11
4.2.1. One-dimensional Vandermonde matrix. Let r “ 1, and let Nn Ă Zrx1 s be the Z-module consisting
of polynomials in x “ x1 of degree ă n. In the basis m1 “ 1, m2 “ x, . . . , mn “ xn´1 , the matrix
                                                         1 z1 . . . z1n´1
                                                        ¨                 ˛
                                                        ˚1 z2 . . . z n´1 ‹
                                                                     2
                               VNn pz1 , . . . , zn q “ ˚ . .
                                                        ˚                 ‹
                                                                       .. ‹
                                                        ˝ .. ..         . ‚
                                                                      n´1
                                                         1 zn . . . zn
is the classical Vandermonde matrix, and hence
                                                               ź
                                         tNn pτ q “ sup             |zi ´ zj |
                                                    zPτ N 1ďiăjďn

is related to the logarithmic capacity, or transfinite diameter, of τ . There are several possible higher-
dimensional generalisations. We consider two special cases, the ‘rectangular’ and ‘homogeneous’ versions.

4.2.2. ‘Rectangular’ Vandermonde matrices. Let n1 , . . . , nr ě 0 and let
                                               à
                              rec
                            Npn 1 ,...,nr q
                                            “                  Z xi11 xi22 . . . xirr
                                                0ďi1 ăn1 ,...,0ďir ănr

be the free module generated by all monomials of degree ă ni in each variable xi . It is the tensor product
                                     rec
(4.5)                               Npn1 ,...,nr q
                                                   – Nn1 bZ Nn2 bZ . . . bZ Nnr
where Nn Ă Zrxs consists of polynomials of degree ă n as in §4.2.1. The matrix Vpn1 ,...,nr q pzq “ VN rec pzq
is called the rectangular multivariable Vandermonde matrix. Its rank and the determinantal degree are
                   rec                                                n 1 . . . nr
(4.6)      rank Npn  1 ,...,nr q
                                 “ n1 . . . nr and deg pdet N rec q “              pn1 ` . . . ` nr ´ rq .
                                                                           2
Example 4.3. Let r “ 2, and n1 “ 3, n2 “ 2. Then if we denote the coordinates on A2 by px, yq, we
may write zi “ pxi , yi q P C2 and we have
                                                         ¨                         ˛
                                                          1 x1 x21 y1 x1 y1 x21 y1
                                                         ˚1 x2 x22 y2 x2 y2 x22 y2 ‹
                                                         ˚                         ‹
                                                         ˚1 x3 x23 y3 x3 y3 x23 y3 ‹
                             Vp3,2q pz1 , . . . , z6 q “ ˚                         ‹
                                                         ˚1 x4 x24 y4 x4 y4 x24 y4 ‹
                                                         ˚                         ‹
                                                         ˝1 x5 x25 y5 x5 y5 x25 y5 ‚
                                                          1 x6 x26 y6 x6 y6 x26 y6
Its determinant has degree 9. Its absolute value is a function on pC2 q6 .
4.2.3. ‘Homogeneous’ Vandermonde matrices. Let n ě 0 and let
                                      à       à
                             Nnhom “                 Z xi11 xi22 . . . xirr
                                              0ďkăn i1 `...`ir “k

be the direct sum of the free modules generated by all homogeneous monomials in x1 , . . . , xr of degree k,
for 0 ď k ă n. When r “ 1 it coincides with the rectangular case. It has rank and determinantal degree
                              ˆ         ˙                                  ˆ           ˙
                                n`r´1                       `         ˘      n`r´1
(4.7)          rank Nnhom “                   and        deg det Nnhom “ r                  .
                                  r                                            r`1
Example 4.4. Let r “ 2 and let A2 have coordinates px, yq as above. Then
                                                   ¨                       ˛
                                                     1 x1 y1 x21 x1 y1 y12
                                                   ˚1 x2 y2 x22 x2 y2 y22 ‹
                                                   ˚                       ‹
                                                   ˚1 x3 y3 x23 x3 y3 y32 ‹
                        V3hom pz1 , . . . , z6 q “ ˚
                                                   ˚1 x4 y4 x24 x4 y4 y42 ‹
                                                                           ‹
                                                   ˚                       ‹
                                                   ˝1 x5 y5 x25 x5 y5 y52 ‚
                                                     1 x6 y6 x26 x6 y6 y62
The determinant has degree 8. Its absolute value is a function on pC2 q6 .
4.3. Upper bounds for Vandermonde determinants. We can deduce upper bounds for tM pτ q
relative to basic operations on Z-modules by applying formulae for determinants. Here we consider direct
sums (using a formula due to Laplace which essentially computes detpN1 ‘ N2 q) and tensor products
(using a formula in Appendix A, which computes detpN1 b N2 q).
                                                          12
4.3.1. Tensor products. Let N1 and N2 be two free Z-submodules of R of finite rank, such that the image
of their tensor product N1 b N2 in R via the map R b R Ñ R is also free.

Theorem 4.5. Let N1 and N2 be free Z-modules as above, and let ni “ rank Ni , for i “ 1, 2. Let
τ Ă V pCq. Then there is an upper bound
                                                     pn1 n2 q! n2
                                    tN1 bN2 pτ q ď             t pτ qtnN12 pτ q ,
                                                     Hn1 ,n2 N1
where the number H is defined in (A.3).

Proof. Let z “ pz1 , . . . , zn1 n2 q in V n1 n2 pCq. For a suitable ordering on the generators, the Vandermonde
matrix of the tensor product is an amalgam:
                                                                                             `       ˘
            VN1 bN2 pzq “ Apzq ‹ Bpzq                where      Apzq “ pmj pzi qq , Bpzq “ m1j pzi q

are matrices with n1 n2 rows and n1 (resp. n2 ) columns, where m1 , . . . , mn1 is a basis for N1 and
m11 , . . . , m1n2 is a basis for N2 . It follows from theorem A.3 that

                                       pn1 n2 q!                          n                      n
                 |det VN1 bN2 pzq| ď             max p|detpVN1 pzi qiPI q| 2 |detpVN2 pzj qjPJ q| 1 q
                                       Hn1 ,n2 I,J
where I, J are subsets of t1, . . . , mnu with |I| “ n1 and |J| “ n2 . It follows that if z P τ n1 n2 , i.e., all
components zi P τ , we have
                                                         pn1 n2 q! n2
                                  |det VN1 bN2 pzq| ď             t pτ qtnN12 pτ q .
                                                         Hn1 ,n2 N1
By taking the supremum over all z P τ n1 n2 , we obtain the stated inequality.                                 □

   Note that even if the generators mi m1j satisfy linear relations (i.e., the image of N1 b N2 is not free)
the left-hand side vanishes and the bound is still valid. The inequality in the previous proposition can,
after taking suitable limits, become an equality in certain situations: see [Bro25][Theorem 6.1] for an
example in the case when τ is a product. The examples of §6 show that the further one deviates from
such a product situation, the worse the upper bound can become.

4.3.2. Direct sums. A similar, but more elementary, formula holds for direct sums. Let N1 , N2 be free
Z-submodules of R of finite rank such that the image of N1 ‘ N2 in R via the map R ‘ R Ñ R is free.

Proposition 4.6. Let N1 and N2 be as above, and let ni “ rank Ni , for i “ 1, 2. Let τ Ă V pCq. Then
there is an upper bound
                                           ˆ          ˙
                                             n1 ` n 2
                            tN1 ‘N2 pτ q ď              tN1 pτ qtN2 pτ q .
                                                n1
Proof. Let z “ pzi q1ďiďn1 `n2 P V pCqn1 `n2 . Expanding the determinant of VN1 ‘N2 pzq via Laplace’s
formula as a sum over complementary minors gives
                                              ÿ
                            det VN1 ‘N2 pzq “   εI,J det VN1 pzI q det VN2 pzJ q
                                                   I,J

where the sum is over all subsets I Ă t1, . . . , n1 ` n2 u such that |I| “ n1 , and J is its complement. The
coefficients satisfy εI,J P t1, ´1u. Now take the absolute value and the supremum over z P τ n1 `n2 .      □


                                   5. Supremal transfinite diameter
   We define a notion of transfinite diameter in which the limit is replaced by a limit supremum, and
work in the setting of affine schemes V . The limits will be taken with respect to certain exponents e,
which are introduced to allow additional flexibility. In this section we state and prove some properties
of the supremal diameter with respect to natural operations on modules.
   In brief, the supremal transfinite diameter provides a pairing between subsets τ Ă V pCq and free
modules M Ă OpV q with some additional data. It produces a number denoted SupM pτ q P Rě0 Y t8u.
                                                         13
5.1. Definition. Throughout, let V “ Spec R be as in §4.1. Consider a free Z-module M Ă R which
has a filtration by (necessarily free) Z-submodules of finite rank
                                          Mn Ă M            for n ě 1 ,
such that Mn Ă Mn`1 and M “ ÝÑ Mn . Consider a sequence of exponents
                            lim
                                                    eM
                                                     n PN .
The exponents will usually grow a little faster than the rank:
                                      eM
                                       n
(5.1)                          lim           “8             where rn “ rank Mn .
                               nÑ8 rn log rn

Definition 5.1. Given a filtered Z-module M, and exponents eM , we define the supremal transfinite
diameter of a set τ Ă V pCq to be
                                                                          1
                                     SupM,e pτ q “ lim sup ptMn pτ qq eM
                                                                       n ,
                                                     nÑ8

where tMn pτ q is the supremum of the Vandermonde determinant | det Mn | on τ rankMn (definition 4.1).
   Note that the limit supremum SupM pτ q may be infinite, but always exists. It follows immediately
from the definition that if τ Ă τ 1 then
(5.2)                                     SupM,e pτ q ď SupM,e pτ 1 q .
Remark 5.2. When the exponent function is clear from the context, we shall drop it and simply write
SupM . Note that if e1n “ αn en , where the αn tend to a limit α as n Ñ 8, one has the identity:
                                                                     1
                                         SupM,e1 pτ q “ SupM,e pτ q α .
Examples 5.3. Consider the case V “ Ar . Denote its coordinate ring by OpV q “ Zrx1 , . . . , xr s.
                     ˘ take Mn Ă M “ Zrxs to be the subspace of polynomials in x of degree ă n,
   (1) If r “ 1 we` may
             n “ 2 . Then, as in §4.2,
                   n
       and eM
                                            ˜                           2
                                                                   ¸ npn´1q
                                                   ź
                         SupM pτ q “ lim sup sup        |zi ´ zj |
                                            nÑ8      zi Pτ 1ďiăjďn

        which equals the transfinite diameter of τ Ă C whenever it exists (e.g., if τ is compact).

    (2) For general r, let 0 ă a1 , . . . , ar P N and let M “ Zrx1 , . . . , xr s equipped with the filtration by
                               rec
        submodules Mn “ Npa      1 n,...,ar nq
                                                 with exponent function
                                                 a1 . . . ar                         r
(5.3)                      eM
                            n    “ nr`1                      pa1 ` . . . ` ar ´ q
                                                     2                               n
                                         nr`1
                                 „               a1 . . . ar pa1 ` . . . ` ar q          as n Ñ 8
                                            2
        as in §4.2.2. Then we define for any τ Ă Cr
                                                                  ´                           1
                                                                                            ¯ M
                             Supparec
                                                                                             en
                                    1 ,...,ar q
                                                pτ q “ lim sup tNpa     rec
                                                                            n,...,a nq
                                                                                       pτ q     .
                                                                1     r
                                                   nÑ8
        It equals the ‘rectangular’ transfinite diameter of τ if the latter exists, which holds for example
        when τ is compact. This is a special case of [BBL18][Theorem 5.1, Rem. 5.2].

    (3) Let n ě 0 and let M “ Zrx1 , . . . , xr s with the filtration by submodules Mn “ Nnhom as defined
        in §4.2.3. The exponent function is
                                          ˆ             ˙ ˆ          ˙ r`1
                                             n`r´1               r     n
(5.4)                          ehom
                                n   “   r                 „                 .
                                                r`1             r`1      r!
        Then we define for any τ Ă Cr
                                                                     ˘ 1
                                 Suphom
                                                          `
                                    n      pτ q “ lim sup tNnhom pτ q enM .
                                                    nÑ8
        It is the usual ‘homogeneous’ transfinite diameter of τ when it exists. Similarly, the limit exists
        when τ is compact as a consequence of [BBL18][Theorem 5.1, Rem. 5.2].

                                                       14
These particular examples are special cases of what is called the C-transfinite diameter in [LW21], which
in turn is a special case of the more general definition for an arbitrary module given above.
Remark 5.4. When the degree of the Vandermonde determinant makes sense, we define the exponent
function to be det Mn Ă Rrank Mn , as in the examples above. More generally, let Gm ˆ Ar Ñ Ar be the
action which on complex points scales coordinates by λ P Gm pCq “ Cˆ . Then p1q-p3q satisfy
(5.5)                              SupM pλτ q “ λ SupM pτ q         for all λ P Cˆ .
In general, whenever V admits a Gm -action of this sort and its affine ring is graded with non-negative
degrees and is of finite rank in each graded degree, it is advisable to choose the exponent function to be
                                                                 rankM
                                                                    ÿ n
                                      eM
                                       n “ deg pdet Mn q “                degpmi q
                                                                   i“1

where the mi are any choice of independent homogenous generators for Mn . It is compatible with the
grading and guarantees that a scaling law (5.5) holds.
5.1.1. Functoriality and torsion. The supremal diameter is functorial in the following sense. Let f : V Ñ
V 1 “ SpecpR1 q be a morphism as in §4.1.1, and consider a free Z-module N Ă R1 which is f -admissible.
                                                    ˚
Suppose that eN is an exponent function and let efn N “ eN . Then by (4.4)
(5.6)                                        Supf ˚ N pτ q “ SupN pf τ q .
   The supremal diameter is insensitive to ‘small’ modifications of the module M. For example, suppose
that M1 Ă M are as above and M1n Ă Mn is free of equal rank. Let Cn denote the cardinality of the
                                                                                1
                                                                                     M
torsion module Mn {M1n . If the corresponding exponent functions are equal: eM n “ en , then by (4.3)
                                                                                      1
                                                                                     eM
                             SupM pτ q “ SupM1 pτ q       whenever        lim Cn n “ 1 .
                                                                          nÑ8

The latter condition on the limit holds unless Cn grows rapidly as a function of the rank of Mn .
Consequently, the Z-module structure on M does not usually play an important role in the theory.
Example 5.5. For example, if M is as in p1q above, and
                                          M1n “ Zr1, 2x, 3x2 , . . . , nxn´1 s ,
then Cn “ n! and SupM1 pτ q “ SupM pτ q. But if, for example,
                                        M1n “ Zr1, 2x, 4x2 , . . . , 2n´1 xn´1 s ,
               2
then Cn „ 2n {2 and so SupM1 pτ q “ SupM p2τ q “ 2 SupM pτ q by (5.6) where f is the map x ÞÑ 2x.
5.2. Summary of known results. For our applications, we are interested in upper bounds for the
supremal diameter. We briefly list some known results on the transfinite diameter.

5.2.1. 1-dimensional case. This situation is classical and well-studied. One knows that
                                                           pb ´ aq
(5.7)                                   Suphom pra, bsq “ tpra, bsq “
                                                              4
whenever a ă b. The module and exponent function are as in §4.2.

5.2.2. Rectangular transfinite diameter. Unfortunately, there are few results which establish the precise
value of the transfinite diameter in higher dimensions. For the rectangular case §4.2.2, very little seems
to be known. We show below that the rectangular diameter Suprec             pa1 ,...,ar q is multiplicative. In particular
                                                ´                      r
                                                                    ¯ r`s ´                         s
                                                                                                 ¯ r`s
                      Suprec                        rec
                          p1,...,1q pτ1 ˆ τ2 q “ Supp1,...,1q pτ1 q         Suprecp1,...,1q pτ2 q

for any τ1 Ă Cr and τ2 Ă Cs . In the case r “ s “ 1 we recover the formula [LW21][Theorem 5.1]. Since,
in one dimension, the rectangular and homogeneous transfinite diameters coincide, we may use (5.7) to
deduce the rectangular transfinite diameter of a rectangular box:
                                               a
                     rec                        pb ´ aqpd ´ cq
(5.8)             Supp1,1q pra, bs ˆ rc, dsq “                   where a ă b , c ă d .
                                                     4
                                                           15
5.2.3. Homogeneous transfinite diameter. This is the standard notion of transfinite diameter. We shall
denote it by tr. The existence of the limits for compact sets was proven by [Zah75], in which case
tr “ Suphom . The multiplicativity of the homogeneous transfinite diameter was established in [SS62],
[BC99, Theorem 1]. Let τ1 Ă Cm and τ2 Ă Cn be compact sets. Then
                                                                  m           n
(5.9)                               trpτ1 ˆ τ2 q “ trpτ1 q m`n trpτ2 q m`n .
                                       m                      n
Thus Suphom pτ1 ˆ τ2 q “ Suphom pτ1 q m`n Suphom pτ2 q m`n . It may be possible to derive this directly from
the formula for the determinant of a matrix amalgam (Appendix §A). In particular, the homogeneous
supremal diameter for a rectangular box coincides with the rectangular version, and is given by (5.8).
   Let τ Ă Cn . Then for any P P GLn pCq one has the formula
                                                                      1
(5.10)                                  trpP τ q “ | detpP q| n trpτ q ,
which can be proven from the definition §4.2.3 using standard properties of the determinant and the scal-
ing law (5.5). Equation (5.10) may be generalised to certain homogeneous polynomial transformations.
Indeed, [BC99, DR07] show that for any regular polynomial map F : Cn Ñ Cn of degree d one has
                                                                          1       1
                                     trpF ´1 σq “ |ResFh |´ ndn trpσq d
where Res denotes a certain resultant associated to the homogeneous part Fh of F .
  In addition, the following specific results in two dimensions will be useful:
    (1) (Unit ball). It is known by Bos [Bos89] that if B “ tpx, yq P R2 : x2 ` y 2 ď 1u denotes the unit
        ball in R2 , the transfinite diameter equals:
                                                         1
                                                trpBq “ ? .
                                                         2e
    (2) (Unit triangle). By applying the map px, yq ÞÑ px2 , y 2 q, one deduces [BC99, p. 302] that the
        transfinite diameter of a triangle T Ă R2 with vertices p0, 0q, p1, 0q and p0, 1q is
                                                      1
                                           trpT q “      „ 0.18393 . . .
                                                      2e
    (3) (General triangle). By applying an element (5.10) in GL2 pRq, we deduce that for any triangle
        T Ă R2 , its transfinite diameter equals
                                                                          1
                                                         volpT q 2
(5.11)                                        trpT q “      ?      .
                                                          e 2
         This will be used to estimate the transfinite diameter associated to ζp2q.
The homogeneous transfinite diameter of the ball and simplex in Rn were computed in [TB12].

5.3. Supremal diameter for tensor products. Let M, N be two filtered Z-submodules of R and
suppose that M b N Ă R is a free Z-module equipped with the filtration pM b N qn “ Mn b Nn .
Theorem 5.6. Let M, N , M b N be as above with exponent functions eM , eN , eMbN . Suppose that
eMbN satisfies (5.1) and
                             eM
                              n rank Nn                               eN
                                                                       n rank Mn
                          lim           “α            and             lim        “β .
                         nÑ8   eMbN
                                n                                 nÑ8    eMbN
                                                                          n

Then we have the upper bound
                                                                      α               β
(5.12)                          SupMbN pτ q ď pSupM pτ qq pSupN pτ qq                     .
Proof. For brevity write rn “ rank Mn , sn “ rank Nn . Let n be sufficiently large that rn , sn ą 0. By
Theorem 4.5,
                                                prn sn q! sn
                                tpMbN qn pτ q ď           t pτ qtrNnn pτ q .
                                                Hrn ,sn Mn
By applying the bound m! ď mm for integers m ě 0, we deduce that
                   ˆ          ˙ 1                           ˆ               ˙
                     prn sn q! eMbN
                                n
                                                     1
                                                   MbN         rn sn
                                    ď pprn sn q!q en   ď exp MbN logprn sn q .
                     Hrn ,sn                                  en
                                                         16
Since rankpM b N qn “ rn sn , the assumption (5.1) implies that the previous expression tends to 1 in
the limit as n Ñ 8. It follows that
                       ˜ˆ              ˙αn ˆ 1        ˙βn ¸
                                                                      eM rank Nn         eN rank Mn
                              1
                             eM                N
                                                            where αn “ n MbN     , βn “ n MbN
                                             e
SupMbN pτ q ď lim sup       tMn n pτ q      tNnn pτ q                                                 .
                 nÑ8                                                    en                 en

By assumption αn Ñ α and βn Ñ β as n Ñ 8. The result follows from the definition of the limit
supremum, together with the fact that the previous expression only involves positive quantities, and that
the exponential and logarithm restricted to the positive real axis are increasing monotone functions. □

Corollary 5.7. Let M, N and M b N be as above, but suppose that Nn is stationary, i.e., Nn “ N
for all n sufficiently large. In particular, N is of finite rank. Suppose we are given exponent functions
eM and eMbN where the latter satisfies (5.1), such that the following limit exists:

                                                   eM
                                                    n rank N
                                               lim           “α.
                                               nÑ8   eMbN
                                                      n

Then, if τ is bounded, we have the upper bound:
                                                                      α
                                             tsup          sup
                                              MbN pτ q ď ptM pτ qq         .

Proof. Define an exponent function for Nn to be eN      n “ rank N . With this definition, the limit β in
theorem 5.6 is zero. Since τ is bounded, tsup
                                          N   pτ q is finite, and hence (5.12) implies the stated inequality,
        sup    β
since ptN pτ qq “ 1.                                                                                       □

Remark 5.8. A natural definition of eMbN , which applies in the examples 5.3, is

(5.13)                               eMbN
                                      n   “ eM            N
                                             n rank Nn ` en rank Mn .

When this holds, we have α ` β “ 1 in the setting of theorem 5.6.

   In some cases, (5.12) is an equality. The following corollary is not as general as possible since it
assumes the existence of limits, but is related to results in the literature on transfinite diameters [LW21].
It proves that the (supremal) transfinite diameter is multiplicative with respect to external products.

Corollary 5.9. Let Ni Ă Ri be free Z-modules filtered by finite rank submodules and equipped with
exponent functions eNi . Consider the tensor product N1 b N2 Ă R1 b R2 , which is free and equipped with
the tensor product filtration. Suppose that
                                     eN
                                      n rank pN2´i qn
                                       i
                                  lim                 “ αi           for       i “ 1, 2 .
                                 nÑ8     eN
                                          n
                                            1 bN2



Write Vi “ Spec Ri , and consider τi Ă Vi pCq for i “ 1, 2. Suppose that the limit suprema SupNi pτi q are
actual limits for i “ 1, 2. Then
                                                  `            ˘α1 `             ˘α2
                            SupN1 bN2 pτ1 ˆ τ2 q “ SupN1 pτ1 q       SupN2 pτ2 q

and the limit supremum on the left is also a limit.

Proof. Let R “ R1 b` R2 . There       ˘α1are` canonical˘αembeddings          of Z-modules Ri Ñ R. The inequality
                                                           2
SupN1 bN2 pτ1 ˆ τ2 q ď SupN1 pτ1 q           SupN2 pτ2 q     follows from theorem 5.6. To obtain a lower bound
the idea is as follows. For all sufficiently large n, choose a configuration of ri “ rankpNi qn points
z 1 P τ1r1 and z 2 P τ2r2 such that | det VpN1 qn pz 1 q| and | det VpN2 qn pz 2 q| are arbitrarily close to SupN1 pτ1 q
and SupN2 pτ2 q, respectively. Consider the configuration of r1 r2 points wij “ pzi1 , zj2 q in τ1 ˆ τ2 where
1 ď i ď r1 , 1 ď j ď r2 . For a suitable ordering of these points, one may show [Bro25, §3.2,§6] that
the Vandermonde matrix VpN1 bN2 qn pwij q, expressed as an amalgam of two matrices, is in fact their
Kronecker tensor product and hence
                                                      ˇ                  ˇr2 ˇ                ˇ r1
                          | det VpN1 bN2 qn pwij q| “ ˇdet VpN1 qn pz 1 qˇ ˇdet VpN2 qn pz 2 qˇ .
                            N1 bN2 ´1
By raising
        ` to the power
                    ˘α1 ` pen     q ˘ , we obtain a lower bound for tnN1 bN2 pτ1 ˆ τ2 q which is arbitrarily
                                     α2
close to SupN1 pτ1 q     SupN2 pτ2 q .                                                                    □
                                                          17
5.4. Supremal diameter for direct sums. Let M, N Ă R be two free Z-modules equipped with
filtrations by finite rank submodules. The direct sum M‘N is given the filtration pM‘N qn “ Mn ‘Nn .
We assume that it is free when viewed as a submodule of R via the map R ‘ R Ñ R.
Proposition 5.10. Suppose that we are given free Z-submodules M, N and M ‘ N of R as above, and
exponents eM , eN , eM‘N , where the latter satisfies (5.1). If
                                         eMn                               eN
                                                                            n
                                     lim M‘N
                                                  “α           ,     lim  M‘N
                                                                                          “β
                                    nÑ8 en                           nÑ8 en

we have the inequality
                                                                       α                  β
                                   SupM‘N pτ q ď pSupM pτ qq pSupN pτ qq                       .
Proof. Let n ě 0, rn “ rank Mn , and sn “ rank Nn . By proposition 4.6
                                                 ˆ         ˙
                                                   rn ` sn
                                  tMn ‘Nn pτ q ď            tMn pτ qtNn pτ q .
                                                      rn
                             eM‘N
Since rnr`s
      `      ˘
         n
           n
               ď 2rn `sn and rnn `sn Ñ 8 as n Ñ 8, we have
                                    ˆ         ˙ 1
                                     rn ` sn eM‘Nn
                                                       Ñ 1 as n Ñ 8 ,
                                        rn
                                                                                  1
and we conclude by raising both sides of the previous inequality to the power eM‘N    and letting n Ñ 8.
                                                                                n
This uses similar properties of limit suprema as set out at the end of the proof of theorem 5.6.      □
Remark 5.11. The canonical exponent function for a direct sum is
                                                eM‘N
                                                 n   “ eM    N
                                                        n ` en .

With this definition, the exponents in the previous theorem satisfy
                                          eM
                                           n                                       eN
                                                                                    n
                               α “ lim                     ,           β “ lim
                                    nÑ8 en ` eN
                                         M
                                              n                             nÑ8 en ` eN
                                                                                 M
                                                                                      n
                                                                            eM‘N
and in particular, α ` β “ 1. The proof only requires that rankpM
                                                                n
                                                                  n ‘Nn q
                                                                          Ñ 8 which is weaker than (5.1).
   One may also retrieve corollary 5.7 using the previous proposition by writing M b N as a direct sum
‘i mi M where the mi are a basis of N .
Corollary 5.12. Suppose that M, N1 , . . . , Nk Ă R are free Z-modules with a filtration by finite rank
submodules such that, for all n ě 0,
                                                  k
                                                  à
                                           Mn “     pNi qn ,
                                                          i“1
                                                                                               Ni
and exponents e  Ni
                      and e , where the latter satisfies (5.1). If limnÑ8 eenM “ αi then
                           M
                                                                                               n

                                                         k
                                                         ź     `                ˘αi
                                           SupM pτ q ď             SupNi pτ q         .
                                                         i“1

                6. Upper bounds for a square region bounded by a hyperbola
   As an application of these techniques, we compute some upper estimates for the rectangular supremal
transfinite diameter Suprec
                         p1,1q pτϵ q of the region:

                                   τϵ “ tpx, yq P R2 : 0 ď x, y ď 1 , xy ď ϵu
                                 ` ϵ ˘ 13
and show that Suprecp1,1q pτϵ q ď 16      as ϵ Ñ 0. A key point is that we reduce the rectangular supremal
diameter (about which little seems to be known) to the homogeneous diameter (about which much more
is known) of a different region. If formulae for the transfinite diameters of two-dimensional figures in R2
such as a quadrilateral were available, our estimates could be significantly improved.
6.1. Naı̈ve bound. Since τϵ Ă r0, 1s2 we deduce from (5.2) that
                                                                                              1     1
                          Suprec              rec          2
                             p1,1q pτϵ q ď Supp1,1q pr0, 1s q “ pSup
                                                                     hom
                                                                         pr0, 1sq 2 q2 “              ,
                                                                                                    4
which follows from (5.8) and (5.7) since Suprec
                                            p1q “ Sup
                                                     hom
                                                         in dimension 1.
                                                           18
6.2. Use of tensor products: map to a curved rhombus.
Lemma 6.1. Let N “ Z ‘ Zx. The inclusion
                                           i : Zrxy, x ` ys b N ÝÑ Zrx, ys
is an isomorphism of Z-modules.
Proof. Let u “ xy and v “ x ` y. Then one has the relation x2 “ xv ´ u. Consider the ring structure
on Zru, vs b N induced by the identification of Z-modules:
                                       Zru, vs b N – pZru, vs b Zrxsq {I
where I is the ideal generated by x2 ´ xv ` u. Thus the natural map i of Z-modules can be promoted
to a map of rings for the induced ring structure:
                         pu, v, xq ÞÑ pxy, x ` y, xq : pZru, vs b Zrxsq {I ÝÑ Zrx, ys .
Since the ring generators x, y of Zrx, ys are in the image of i, it is surjective. To prove injectivity, consider
the graded Poincaré series of Zru, vs, where u has degree 2 and v has degree 1. It is
                                                              1
                                         PZru,vs ptq “
                                                       p1 ´ tqp1 ´ t2 q
If x, y are given degree 1, we have PN ptq “ 1 ` t and hence
                                                      1`t             1
                                 PZru,vsbN ptq “              2
                                                                 “
                                                 p1 ´ tqp1 ´ t q   p1 ´ tq2
which equals the Poincaré series of Zrx, ys, since it has two generators in degree 1. This proves that after
tensoring with Q, the map i b Q is an isomorphism of graded Q-vector spaces. Since a submodule of a
free Z-module is free, pker iq b Q “ kerpi b Qq “ 0, and hence i is injective.                             □
Proposition 6.2. Let τ Ă R2 be a region in R2 , and consider the map
                                                      ϕ : R2 ÝÑ R2
                                                                                       2
which maps px, yq to pxy, x ` yq. Then Suprec
                                          p1,1q pτ q ď pSup
                                                           hom
                                                               pϕτ qq 3 .
Proof. Let us write N “ Z ‘ xZ and set M “ Zrx, ys, P “ Zrxy, x ` ys, equipped with the rectangular
and homogeneous filtrations, respectively:
                              à                          à
                     Mn “          xi y j Z , ,    Pn “       pxyqi px ` yqj Z .
                               0ďi,jăn                                         0ďi,j
                                                                              i`jăn

By lemma 6.1 and the fact that the map i respects the filtrations by degree in x and y, we find that
(6.1)                      Mn – pPn b N q ‘ Cn                 and          P n b N “ Mn ‘ K n
where Cn (resp. Kn ) is the free Z-module of rank n with generators xi y n´1 for 0 ď i ď n ´ 1 (resp.
generated by xpxyqi px ` yqj for i ` j “ n ´ 1). Recall from (5.3) and (5.4) that
                                                          npn ´ 1qpn ´ 2q    n3
                         eM    2
                          n “ n pn ´ 1q „ n
                                            3
                                                          ,   eP
                                                               n “         „    .
                                                                 3            3
If we define eN
              n “ 0 then using the convention (5.13) we have
                                                              2 3
                                      ePbN
                                       n    “ ePn rank Nn „ n .
                                                              3
Since the total degrees of the determinants of Cn , Kn are quadratic in n, we have
                                   1                                1
                           tCn pτ q eM
                                     n Ñ1         ,       tKn pτ q eM
                                                                    n Ñ1               as n Ñ 8 .
It follows from proposition 4.6 applied to each direct sum in (6.1) that
                                                      2                                             3
                       SupM pτ q ď SupPbN pτ q 3              and       SupPbN pτ q ď SupM pτ q 2
                                       2
and hence SupM pτ q “ SupPbN pτ q 3 . Now, by the corollary to theorem 5.6 and the asymptotics of the
exponent functions given above, we deduce that
                                              SupPbN pτ q ď SupP pτ q .
We conclude that
                                                                        2                  2
                               SupM pτ q “ SupPbN pτ q 3 ď SupP pτ q 3 .
           ˚
Since P “ ϕ Zru, vs where ϕpu, vq “ pxy, x ` yq, the statement follows from (5.6).                             □
                                                               19
Example 6.3. Let τ “ r0, as ˆ r0, bs where a, b ą 0. Then ϕpτ q is (comfortably)  ?          contained in both the
rectangle r0, abs ˆ r0, a ` bs, or a triangle with vertices p0, 0q, p0, a ` bq, p abpa ` bq{2, a ` bq. We obtain
                             ?                       ¯ 32
                                                                #      1         1      1         2
                                                                                                    +
                 rec           ab ´        hom                    pabq 3 pa ` bq 3 pabq 6 pa ` bq 3
             Supp1,1q pτ q “       ď Sup       pϕτ q      ď min                    ,                  ,
                               4                                        42{3          p8e2 q1{3

by (5.9), (5.8) and (5.11) respectively. The above is consistent with the arithmetic-geometric mean
inequality. The slippage in the constant in the denominator comes from the fact that the image of ϕpτ q
lies in the smaller region satisfying y ě 4x2 (once more by the AM-GM inequality).
Example
     ?      6.4. The image ϕpτϵ q is contained in a quadrilateral with vertices p0, 0q, p0, 1q, pϵ, 1 ` ϵq,
pϵ, 2 ϵq. By applying the linear transformation px, yq ÞÑ px, y ´ xq, which has determinant 1, the latter
is transformed to a region Rϵ which fits inside a rectangle r0, ϵs ˆ r0, 1s. Therefore we conclude that
                                                             ¯ 23   ˆ ? ˙ 23   ´ ϵ ¯ 31
                                    ´                                  ϵ
                    Suprec   pτ
                        p1,1q ϵ q ď  Suphom
                                            pr0, ϵs ˆ r0, 1sq     “          “          .
                                                                      4         16
The same region is contained in a triangle Tϵ with vertices p0, 0q, p0, 1q and p 2?ϵϵ´ϵ , 1q and so
                                                                ˆ              ˙ 13       ˆ                  ˙ 13
                                                          2         volpTϵ q                       ϵ
                        Suprec
                           p1,1q pτϵ q ď Sup
                                             hom
                                                 pTϵ q 3 “                            “            ?                ,
                                                                      2e2                       2
                                                                                              4e p2 ϵ ´ ϵq
which is an improvement on the previous bound in the range ϵ ą 0.1042. Nevertheless, these bounds
can be quite crude for general values of ϵ. The region Rϵ constructed   ?           above, which is contained in
a quadrilateral
             ?   with  vertices   p0, 0q, p0, 1q,
                                               ?  pϵ, 1q, pϵ, 1 `  ϵ ´ 2  ϵq contains the rectangle with corners
p0, 1 ` ϵ ´ 2 ϵq, p0, 1q, pϵ, 1q, pϵ, 1 ` ϵ ´ 2 ϵq and therefore we have a lower bound
                                                                     ? ˙1
                                                             ϵp1 ´ ϵq2 3
                                                          ˆ
                                            hom       2
                                        Sup     pRϵ q 3 ě                    .
                                                                  16
                                         ?
This shows that Suphom pRϵ q „ 4ϵ to leading order in ϵ as ϵ Ñ 0.
6.3. Map to two rectangles (direct sums). Consider the map
                                                                          ϕ
                                                 px, yq ÞÑ pxy, xq : C2 ÝÑ
                                                                         x
                                                                           C2
and similarly let ϕy : C2 Ñ C2 be defined by px, yq ÞÑ pxy, yq.
Proposition 6.5. For any bounded region τ Ă C2 , we have
                                     ´                 ¯ 31 ´                   ¯ 13
                      Sup rec pτ q ď Sup hom pϕx pτ qq        Sup hom pϕy pτ qq      .

Proof. The Z-module spanned by xi y j for 0 ď i, j ă n is a direct sum:
      Zrx, ysrec             x      y
             n “ Zrxysn ‘ x Nn ‘ y Nn                      where       Nnx “ Zrxy, xshom
                                                                                     n´1                 ,   Nny “ Zrxy, yshom
                                                                                                                           n´1 .

Recall that
                  rec                                         npn ´ 1q                Zrxy,xshom         npn ´ 1qpn ´ 2q
           eZrx,ys
            n           “ n2 pn ´ 1q         ,     eZrxys
                                                    n     “                    ,      en´1           “                   ,
                                                                 2                                              3
                               hom
and similarly for eZry,xys           . It follows that
                                 Zrxys                          Zrxy,xshom                     Zrxy,yshom
                                en                             en´1                           en´1               1
                         lim       rec       “0      ,   lim     Zrx,ysrec
                                                                                   “ lim        Zrx,ysrec
                                                                                                             “     .
                        nÑ8 eZrx,ys
                             n
                                                         nÑ8    en                    nÑ8      en                3
Since det |VxNnx pz1 , . . . , zN q| “ |x1 . . . xN | det |VxNnx | and since τ is bounded, it follows from an argument
detailed previously that we may replace xNnx by Nnx , and similarly for yNny . We conclude that
                                        ´                ¯0 ´                    ¯ 31 ´                     ¯ 13
                  Suprec pτ q ď           SupZrxys pτ q       SupZrxy,xshom pτ q         SupZrxy,yshom pτ q
                                        ´                    ¯ 31 ´                  ¯ 13
                                   “      Suphom pϕx pτ qq          Suphom pϕy pτ qq

where the first line follows from corollary 5.12 and the second by (5.6).                                                          □
                                                                 20
Example 6.6. Applying the proposition to τϵ , we see that ϕx pτϵ q is contained in the rectangle r0, ϵsˆr0, 1s
(more precisely in the slightly smaller region where x ď y), and hence
                                                                      2
                                                                          ´ ϵ ¯ 13
                              Suprec pτϵ q ď Suphom pr0, 1s ˆ r0, ϵsq 3 “
                                                                           16
which is exactly the same as the first inequality in example 6.4.
Remark 6.7. There exist various generalisations of this proposition to higher dimensions. The typical
shape of the regions arising from moduli           space integrals [Bro16] are of a similar form and typically
contained in tpx1 , . . . , xr q P r0, 1sr : iPI xi ď ϵI u for some ϵI ą 0 for every subset I Ă t1, . . . , ru.
                                            ś

                     7. Small linear forms from the geometry of numbers
7.1. Minkowski’s theorem on linear forms.
Theorem 7.1. Let A P Mnˆn pRq be a matrix with real entries pAqij “ aij . Then there exists a non-zero
integer vector c “ pc1 , . . . , cn qT P Zn zt0u such that
                                          ˇ           ˇ
                                          ˇÿ n        ˇ
                                               aij cj ˇ ď εi for all 1 ď i ď n ,
                                          ˇ           ˇ
                                          ˇ
                                          ˇj“1        ˇ
              śn
provided that i“1 εi ě | detpAq|.
   In particular, if detpAq ‰ 0 there exists some 1 ď i ď n such that
                                            ˇ           ˇ
                                            ˇÿn         ˇ
(7.1)                                  0ăˇ       aij cj ˇ ď | detpAq|1{n
                                            ˇ           ˇ
                                            ˇj“1        ˇ

which follows from the theorem on setting εi “ | detpAq|1{n for all i. By applying this to a matrix QσN
of Mellin transforms we can deduce the existence of small linear forms in periods. One can also use
Minkowski’s theorem on short vectors for quadratic forms to obtain a similar bound, but the previous
theorem has the advantage that it does not require A to be symmetric nor positive definite.
7.2. Denominators. Let pX, f q be a family of Mellin integrals as considered earlier and let us fix once
and for all a basis ξ1 , . . . , ξm of periods as in lemma 2.1. Let QσN denote the matrix of Mellin integrals
with respect to M “ f ˚ N Ă OpVf q free of rank N , where N Ă OpAr q is free and f -admissible.
                                             ℓ    r
   Let us choose invertible matrices DN        , DN P GLN pQq such that
(7.2)                          r σ “ Dℓ Qσ Dr
                               Q                     P     MN ˆN pZrξ1 , . . . , ξm sq
                                 N    N N N

has entries which are integral linear forms in the ξi . Let
                                                     ℓ        r
                                         δN “ | detpDN q detpDN q| .
Theorem 7.2. If N is sufficiently large and det QσN ‰ 0, then there exists a non-zero linear form in the
ξ1 , . . . , ξm , which is a rational linear combination of Mellin integrals Ipa1 , . . . , an q, such that
                                                ˇ       ˇ
                                                ˇÿm     ˇ `             ˘1
                                            0 ă ˇ ni ξi ˇ ď tN pf σq2 δN N
                                                ˇ       ˇ
                                                ˇi“1    ˇ
where ni P Z and tN pf σq was defined in (4.2).
                      r σ to deduce the existence of a non-zero integer vector 0 ‰ c “ pc1 , . . . , cN qT P ZN
Proof. Apply (7.1) to Q N
and an index 1 ď i ď N such that
                                 ˇ         ˇ ˇ          ˇ1                     1
                                 ˇ rσ ˇ ˇ
                             0 ă ˇpQ                r σ ˇ N “ | detpQσ q| N1 δ N
                                     N cqi ˇ ă ˇdetpQN qˇ            N        N
                                                           1            2
and apply corollary 3.7 which states that | detpQσN q| N ă tM pσq N for N sufficiently large. By (4.4), we
have tM pσq “ tN pf σq. Finally, use the fact that the entries of Q       r σ are integer linear combinations of
                                                                            N
                                                    m
ξ1 , . . . , ξm to write the ith entry of Q
                                          r σ c as ř
                                            N       i“1 ni ξi for some integers ni .                          □
  Under the additional assumptions (P1) -(P3), det QσN ‰ 0 holds automatically, by lemma 3.2. Now
consider the set up of §5.1, i.e., N “ lim         N
                                       ÝÑn Nn and en P N is an exponent function. Define
                                                                  1
                                                                 eN
                                             δN ,e “ lim sup δNn
                                                           N
                                                         21
                                                    ℓ    r
which we recall depends on the choices of matrices DN , DN as above. Henceforth we drop the dependence
on e from the subscript (as in remark 5.2).

7.3. Irrationality criterion.
Corollary 7.3. Suppose that det QσN ‰ 0 for infinitely many values of N . If
                                               Sup2N pf σq δN ă 1
then dimQ pQξ1 ‘ . . . ‘ Qξr q ě 2. In particular, if r “ 2 and ξ1 “ 1, then we retrieve criterion 1.4.
  The following quantity enables us to measure the quality of approximations independently of any
choice of exponent function.
Definition 7.4. Let N be of rank N , and QσN , δN be defined as in §7.2. Define the threshold to be:
                                                      log detpQσN q
(7.3)                                        ϑN “ ´
                                                         log δN
Note that ϑN ą 1 if and only if detpQσN qδN ă 1.
                                               ℓ    r                                             r
7.4. Denominators. We may always find DN         , DN satisfying (7.2) by taking, for example, DN   to be
                     ℓ
the identity and DN to be the diagonal matrix whose pi, iqth entry is the least common multiple of the
denominators of the elements in the ith row of QσN . This can be improved by taking DN        r
                                                                                                to be the
                          th
diagonal matrix whose j entry is the inverse of the greatest common divisor of the coefficients of all
entries in the j th column of the matrix DN
                                          ℓ
                                            QσN P MN ˆN pZrξi sq, which has integral entries.
   In the examples, we find that certain rows and columns of QσN satisfy congruences modulo primes,
which leads to further reductions in the prime factors dividing δN . The question of finding optimal
denominator bounds is an interesting one which will not be pursued further here.
Example 7.5. Consider the example of §1.4. The integer N implicitly depends on n, which we omit
                          ℓ
from the notation. Let DN    be the diagonal matrix whose entry in the ith row is the least common
multiple of the denominators of the elements in row i of the matrix Qσ , and let DN
                                                                                  r
                                                                                    be the identity.
                                ℓ
Lemma 7.6. The determinant of DN  satisfies
                                      ˆ               ˙
                            ℓ              2r ` 1 r`1
                       detpDN q „ exp w          n                     as n Ñ 8
                                            r`1
Proof. The rows of Qσ are indexed by tuples pn1 , . . . , nr q where 0 ď n1 , . . . , nr ď n. The least common
multiple of the denominators of all elements in that row is:
                     plcmt1, . . . , muqw   where m “ maxtn ` n1 , n ` n2 , . . . , n ` nr u
The determinant of DNℓ
                       is the product over all row-indices. Since lcmt1, . . . , M u „ eM ,
                   ℓ
                            ÿ                                                     2r ` 1 r`1
             log DN  „               w maxtn ` n1 , n ` n2 , . . . , n ` nr u „ w       n    .
                       0ďn ,...,n ďn
                                                                                   r`1
                              1     r


To verify the latter asymptotic, we check that
                                                             ˜           ¸
ż                                                ż 2n         r´1
                                                               ź ż xr         ż 2n
                                                                                                       2r ` 1 r`1
         maxtx1 , . . . , xr u dx1 . . . dxr “ r      xr dxr          dxi “ r      xr pxr ´nqr´1 dxr “       n    .
 rn,2nsr                                          n            i“1 n           n                        r`1

                                                                                                               □

   The rectangular exponent function (5.3) has the asymptotic eM    r r`1
                                                                n „ 2n    , and hence
                                                ˆ           ˙
                                                  2w 2r ` 1
(7.4)                                 δN ď exp                .
                                                   r r`1
Remark 7.7. A referee asked the excellent question of whether the matrices Dn can be designed to
make use of the cancellation of primes in the method of Rhin-Viola. I do not know the answer to this
question, but the numerical experiments to be discussed later clearly demonstrate a large degree of ‘prime
cancellation’ of possibly a different nature. It would be very interesting to investigate this further.
                                                       22
7.5. Irrationality criterion via the determinant. The irrationality criterion above is effective in the
sense that it guarantees the existence of small linear forms in the periods ξ1 , . . . , ξm . Another approach
                                       ℓ
is to note that the determinant detpDN   QσN DNr
                                                 q P Zrξ1 , . . . , ξm s is a polynomial form in ξ1 , . . . , ξm with
integer coefficients. This argument generalises the one-dimensional result of Zudilin [Zud17]. In this
                                             ℓ    r
context, one can simply replace δN “ detpDN    DN   q with any dN such that dN detpQσN q P Zrξ1 , . . . , ξm s.
Lemma 7.8. Let QσN P MN ˆN pQrξ1 , . . . , ξm sq and let 0 ă dN P Z be such that dN detpQσN q P Zrξ1 , . . . , ξm s.
If dN | detpQσN q| Ñ 0 as N Ñ 8 and detpQσN q ‰ 0 for infinitely many N , then dimQ Qxξ1 , . . . , ξm y ą 1.
   The proof is obvious, and implies criterion 1.3 when combined with earlier results. In our computations
§9 we write down dN as a (typically good) approximation to δN for ease of computation.
Remark 7.9. In our examples the matrices QσN and their determinants are highly structured owing to
the presence of large symmetry groups. It would be interesting to exploit this structure systematically.

                                8. Comments, variants, generalisations
8.1. Beyond positivity. To establish the non-vanishing of the determinant of QσN we made some
assumptions to ensure that it is positive-definite. However, the assumption pP 1q, for example, can
sometimes be dropped. For instance, theorem 5.9 in [Jed91] gives conditions for the homogeneous
transfinite diameter to be a determinant of integrals similar to the ones considered here.
   The holonomic structure can also be exploited. Consider the case when there is a single parameter
r “ 1. Then the matrix QσN is a Hankel matrix
                                             ¨                         ˛
                                               a0     a1   ...    aN
                                             ˚ a1     a2   . . . aN `1 ‹
                                   HN paq “ ˚ .
                                             ˚                         ‹
                                                       .   ..      .. ‹
                                             ˝ ..      ..      .    . ‚
                                               aN aN `1 . . . a2N
                             ş n
where a “ pan qn with an “ σ f ω. A classical theorem of Kronecker’s implies that the determinant of
                                                                                 ř
HN vanishes for all N sufficiently large if and only if the generating function ak x´k´1 is a rational
function of x. See [BB18, §2], for an overview. The latter can be ruled out on an ad-hoc basis from the
asymptotics of the integrals in question, or their holonomic recurrence equations.2
   In the case when there are more parameters, the matrices QσN are ‘multivariable Hankel forms’ in the
sense of [Pow82], who generalised some of Kronecker’s results to this setting. These results presumably
point to generalisations of the above results with weaker assumptions on the entries of QσN .
8.2. Cohomological determinants. Suppose, as in §2, that Y Ă X is simple normal crossing and
defined over Q. For any integers ni ě 0, the integrand of Ipn1 , . . . , nr q defines a de Rham class
                                    rf1n1 . . . frnr ωs   P               d
                                                                   MdR “ HdR pX, Y q
which is a finite-dimensional Q-vector space. In particular, any set f of linearly independent functions
as in (1.4) produces a set of cohomology classes in MdR , and we may consider the symmetric matrix:
(8.1)                                          QdR
                                                N “ prfi fj ωsq1ďi,jďN

with entries in MdR . They can be paired with any class rσs P MB_ :“ Hd pXpCq, Y pCqq to retrieve the
matrix QσN “ xσ, QdR
                  N y considered earlier. The family of determinants

                                            det QdR
                                                 N        P        Sym‚ pMdR q
form a very interesting algebraic object associated to the data of the Mellin integrals (1.2). Note that
the problem of estimating the denominator of det QσN , relative to a fixed choice of Q-basis for MdR , only
depends on the de Rham matrix QdR  N .

8.2.1. p-adic and other periods. We can deduce many other interesting numbers from det QdR       N . For
instance, we can pair it with any other relative homology class rσ 1 s P MB_ , and we may also take p-adic
periods by considering the pairing xSymN v, Fp det QdR
                                                     N y where Fp is a crystalline Frobenius for p a finite
                                    _
prime of good reduction and v P MdR   . We can even consider its single-valued period (where p “ 8, and
F8 is the real Frobenius). This suggests a notion of p-adic transfinite diameter which is related to the
question of estimating the p-adic valuation of the denominator of det QdR N . See remark 9.7.

   2Incidentally, the fact that the Hankel determinants detpH q are invariant under various operations on the sequence
                                                             N
a “ pan q such as the binomial transform may suggest approaches to improve the denominator estimates
                                                              23
                                       9. Main example: ζp2q and M0,5
   In this section we study in some detail the family of linear forms in 1, ζp2q arising from the moduli space
of curves M0,5 of genus 0 with 5 marked points. Although the applications to the irrationality of ζp2q
are not of particular interest, the underlying geometry and Mellin transforms are very well understood
and so this provides fertile ground for exploring the constructions introduced in this paper.

9.1. A family of Mellin transforms. Consider the family of integrals
                                           ż
(9.1)                Ips1 , . . . , s5 q “   us11 . . . us55 ω for s1 , . . . , s5 ě 0,
                                               r0,1s2
          dxdy
where ω “ 1´xy , and the ui are dihedral ‘coordinates’ [Bro09] given by:
                                           1´x           1´y
(9.2)                    u1 “ x , u2 “           , u3 “        , u4 “ y , u5 “ 1 ´ xy .
                                          1 ´ xy        1 ´ xy
It was shown by Dixon in 1905 that the integrals Ips1 , . . . , s5 q are invariant under dihedral symmetries:
                                         Ips1 , . . . , s5 q “ Ipsρp1q , . . . , sρp5q q
where ρ P D10 is the group of symmetries of a pentagon with edges labelled 1, . . . , 5 in order. One may
show by elementary or geometric means that Iph, i, j, k, ℓq P Zζp2q ` Q and more precisely [RV96] that
(9.3)                                    dm1 dm2 Iph, i, j, k, ℓq P Z ` Zζp2q
where m1 , m2 are the two successive maxima of the entries of the pole vector p “ pp1 , . . . , p5 q where
(9.4)   p1 “ i ` j ´ ℓ    ,     p2 “ j ` k ´ h     ,    p3 “ k ` ℓ ´ i          ,   p4 “ ℓ ` h ´ j   ,   p5 “ h ` i ´ k .
Note that (9.3) is not optimal for certain values of the arguments ph, i, j, k, ℓq. This is exploited in [RV96]
as a consequence of several things including Gauss’ hypergeometric transformation.

9.1.1. Geometric interpretation. See [Bro09, Bro16] for further background. The u1 , . . . , u5 satisfy the
following dihedrally-symmetric set of algebraic relations
(9.5)        u1 u4 ` u5 “ 1 , u2 u5 ` u1 “ 1 , u3 u1 ` u2 “ 1 , u4 u2 ` u3 “ 1 , u5 u3 ` u4 “ 1
which can be interpreted combinatorially via sets of crossing chords in a pentagon [Bro09]. The ideal I
of Zru1 , . . . , u5 s generated by (9.5) defines a smooth affine scheme Mδ0,5 “ Spec pZru1 , . . . , u5 s{Iq which
contains the moduli space M0,5 of curves of genus 0 with 5 ordered marked points
                                                                                       (9.2)
                              M0,5 – A2 z V pxyp1 ´ xqp1 ´ yqp1 ´ xyqq ãÑ Mδ0,5 ,
where A2 “ Spec Qrx, ys. The vanishing locus Y “ V pu1 . . . u5 q Ă Mδ0,5 is a simple normal crossing
divisor with five irreducible components Yi : tui “ 0u and one proves that
                                       M “ H 2 pMδ0,5 , Y q – Qp0q ‘ Qp´2q
which has two periods 1, ζp2q. The domain
                                        σ δ “ tu1 , . . . , u5 ě 0u Ă Mδ0,5 pRq
defines a relative homology class rσ δ s P MB_ whose interior is homeomorphic to p0, 1q2 via (9.2). One
shows that ω P Ω2 pMδ0,5 q has no zeros or poles along Y .
   Thus, in our initial set-up, consider X “ Mδ0,5 equipped with the function
                                                    u : Mδ0,5 ÝÑ A5
whose components are u1 , . . . , u5 . One may show that
(9.6)                               M0,5 “ Mδ0,5 zY          and       Mδ0,5 “ M0,5 zE
where M0,5 is the Deligne-Mumford-Knudsen compactification of M0,5 and E is a divisor ‘at infinity’
with five irreducible components. The parameters p1 , . . . , p5 may be interpreted as (one less than) the
order of the poles of the differential form uh1 ui2 uj3 uk4 uℓ5 ω along each component of E.
   In the remainder of this section we apply the constructions in this paper to families of integrals obtained
by restricting the most general family (9.1) to linear subpaces of the parameter space s1 , . . . , s5 P N5 .
                                                               24
9.2. One parameter family. We first consider the family, considered by Apéry and Beukers [Ape79,
Beu79] where all parameters are equal n1 “ . . . “ n5 “ n.
                        ż
                                                                  xp1 ´ xqyp1 ´ yq
                 Ipnq “         f nω   where f “ u1 u2 u3 u4 u5 “                  .
                         r0,1s2                                        1 ´ xy
It is associated to pMδ0,5 , f q where f : Mδ0,5 Ñ A1 . The anciliary image variety is Vf “ A1 . The function
                                                                                     ?
f has a unique critical point in the unit square given by x0 “ y0 “ ´ 21 ` 25 where it takes the value
                                                ?
                                               5 5 ´ 11
(9.7)                                    η“                „ 0.09017 ,
                                                    2
and so we deduce that
                                      f pr0, 1s2 q Ă r0, ηs Ă Vf pRq “ R
By (9.3), the denominator of Ipnq is d2n . Already this family is sufficient to establish irrationality of ζp2q
using the classical irrationality criterion since e2 η „ 0.6663 ă 1. For later comparisons, the corresponding
threshold would be the quantity θclassical “ ´ log2 η “ 1.203 . . ..
   Now we compare with the 1-dimensional set up of this paper (which gives an equivalent criterion
to that of [Zud17]). Applying the example of §1.4, with r “ 1, w “ 2, and f1 “ f , we obtain the
criterion 41 ηe3 “ 0.4527 . . . ă 1 using the formula (5.7) for the transfinite diameter of an interval. The
corresponding threshold (7.3) is θ1 “ ´ logpη{4q
                                               3     “ 1.2641 . . ., a significant improvement on θclassical .
9.3. Two-parameter family. Consider the family of integrals (9.1) where s2 “ s4 and s1 “ s2 “ s5 .
Thus we set σ “ σ δ Ă Mδ0,5 pRq and
                                           yp1 ´ xq
(9.8)                       f1 “ u2 u4 “               ,        f2 “ u1 u3 u5 “ xp1 ´ yq .
                                            1 ´ xy
These two functions define a map f “ pf1 , f2 q : Mδ0,5 Ñ A2 . Since f1 , f2 are algebraically independent,
the anciliary image variety Vf – A2 . The corresponding period integrals take the form
                                                        xn2 p1 ´ xqn1 y n1 p1 ´ yqn2
                                 ż              ż
                    Ipn1 , n2 q “ f1n1 f2n2 ω “                                      dxdy .
                                  σ              r0,1s2        p1 ´ xyqn2 `1
We consider the modules
                                                           f1i f2j Z Ă OpMδ0,5 q
                                                à
(9.9)                                Mn “
                                            1ďi,jďn´1

which are obtained as the pullback Mn “ f ˚ pZrx1 , x2 srec                                  2
                                                        p1,1q qn of the affine ring of Vf “ A , equipped
with the rectangular filtration §4.2.2. In particular,
(9.10)                            rank Mn “ n2        and         eM    2
                                                                   n “ n pn ´ 1q .

The matrix Qσn is an pn2 ˆn2 q matrix whose entries are the periods Ipn1 , n2 q where 0 ď n1 , n2 ď 2pn´1q.
For n “ 1, we have Qσn “ p1q. By an elementary computation, the image of σ is given by
                                                         ˆ      ˙2
                                                           v´1
(9.11)                 τ “ f pσq “ tu, v P R2 : 0 ď u ď             , 0 ď v ď 1 .u
                                                           v`1
It is contained in the region denoted by τη in §6, where η was defined in (9.7). The vector p “ pp1 , . . . , p5 q
of (9.4) associated to Ipn1 , n2 q satisfies p “ pn1 , n1 , n2 , n2 , n2 q. It follows that
(9.12)                                d2maxtn1 ,n2 u Ipn1 , n2 q P Z ` Zζp2q .
Example 9.1. For n “ 2, M2 has basis p1, f1 , f2 , f1 f2 q. The matrix Qσ2 is
¨ ş         ş         ş        ş           ˛ ¨                                                                   ˛
     γ
       ω       f ω
             γ 1
                          f ω
                        γ 2
                                  f f ω
                                 γ 1 2              ζp2q       ´1 ` ζp2q       2 ´ ζp2q             5 ´ 3ζp2q
˚ ş         ş 2     ş          ş 2         ‹ ˚                    5                                33
                                                                                                               ‹
˚ γ f1 ω       f ω       f f ω
                      γ 1 2
                                  f f ω‹ ˚
                                 γ 1 2 ‹       ˚´1 ` ζp2q ´ 4 ` ζp2q          5 ´ 3ζp2q             4 ´ 5ζp2q
˚                                                                                                              ‹
             γ 1
                                                                                                               ‹.
                                                                                                               ‹
˚ ş       ş           ş 2      ş       2
                                           ‹ “ ˚
˝ γ f2 ω
˚             f f ω
            γ 1 2      γ 2
                          f ω     f f ω‹ ˚
                                 γ 1 2 ‚       ˝ 2 ´ ζp2q       5 ´ 3ζp2q     ´ 32 ` ζp2q         ´ 23
                                                                                                     2 ` 7ζp2q ‹
                                                                                                               ‚
 ş        ş 2       ş          ş
    f f ω γ f1 f2 ω γ f1 f22 ω γ f12 f22 ω
   γ 1 2                                         5 ´ 3ζp2q 33                  23
                                                                4 ´ 5ζp2q ´ 2 ` 7ζp2q
                                                                                                   125
                                                                                                 ´ 4 ` 19ζp2q
It resembles, but is not in fact a classical Hankel matrix. Its determinant is
                                               11         851        145
             det Qσ2 “ ´8ζp2q4 ` 23ζp2q3 ` ζp2q2 ´            ζp2q `       „ 8.05 ˆ 10´6 .
                                                4          16         4
                                                           25
Here, and throughout this section, we let dn denote the denominator of det Qσn . In this case, d1 “ 16. In
practice, we find that dn is very close to δn defined earlier. After clearing denominators, the linear form
remains very small, around 0.000129. It factorises into two terms
(9.13)                 16 det Qσ2 “ ´p8ζp2q2 ´ ζp2q ´ 20qp16ζp2q2 ´ 44ζp2q ` 29q .
The exponent (9.10) in this case is e2 “ 4 and we find that
                                              1                           1{e
                            t2 “ pdet Qσ2 q 4 „ 0.0532             ,     d1 2 “ 161{4 “ 2 .
Example 9.2. For n “ 3, the module M3 has basis
                                 p1, f1 , f2 , f12 , f1 f2 , f22 , f1 f22 , f12 f2 , f12 f22 q
The exponent e3 “ 18. The matrix Q3 is a 9 ˆ 9 matrix whose entries are linear forms in 1, ζp2q. Its
determinant is
                          det Qσ3 “ ´2304 ζp2q9 ` 18160 ζp2q8 ` . . . P Qrζp2qs
The numerical value of det Qσ3 „ 3.76 ˆ 10´27 and its denominator is d3 “ 218 316 . After clearing
denominators, this linear form is of order 4.24 ˆ 10´14 . We find that
                                        1                              1{18
                        t3 “ pdet Qσ3 q 18 „ 0.0340          ,     d3         “ 2p3q16{18 „ 5.3106
  Proceeding in this manner we compute:
           n    Nn     en     detpQσn q                                         dn
            4    16    48   5.19 ˆ 10´75                                    248 330 520
            5    25    100 6.29 ˆ 10´160                                  290 348 548 724
            6    37    180 1.97 ˆ 10´292                                  2147 398 571 758
                                                                        226 160 93 96 32
            7    49    294 4.68 ˆ 10´483                              2 3 5 7 11
            8    64    448 2.46 ˆ 10´742                          2324 3234 5119 7128 1174 1336
            9    81    648 8.41 ˆ 10´1081                         2432 3320 5158 7160 11128 1382
                                                                555 392 199 196 186 140 44
           10   100   900 5.42 ˆ 10´1509                      2 3 5 7 11 13 17
           11   121   1210 1.93 ˆ 10´2037                   2706 3467 5240 7233 11240 13206 1798 1948
           12   144   1584 1.10 ˆ 10´2676                  2872 3560 5280 7284 11288 13274 17164 19106
                                                         1071 665 319 335 338 336 240 176 56
           13   169   2028 2.95 ˆ 10´3437              2     3 5 7 11 13 17 19 23
           14   196   2548 1.08 ˆ 10´4329              21308 3759 5442 7383 11392 13392 17326 19256 23122
           15   225   3150 1.56 ˆ 10´5364              21552 3942 5576 7440 11450 13450 17414 19348 23200
                                                     1804 1144 716 506 509 512 498 444 288 68
           16   256   3840 2.61 ˆ 10´6552           2     3     5 7 11 13 17 19 23 29
These computations were carried out on Maple using standard procedures.
9.3.1. Experimental estimates. The data above may be expressed in the following table. The entries tN
are bounded above by the supremal transfinite diameter.
                                                                         1{e           1{e
                          n rank        en           t2n  log dn n                t2n dn n        ϑn
                          2   4          4        0.05327   0.693                 0.1065         4.231
                          3   9         18        0.03404   1.669                 0.1808         2.025
                          4   16        48        0.02834   2.050                 0.2202         1.738
                          5   25       100        0.02559   2.391                 0.2794         1.533
                          6   36       180        0.02396   2.426                 0.2710         1.538
                          7   49       294        0.02287   2.536                 0.2890         1.490
                          8   64       448        0.02211   2.661                 0.3164         1.432
                          9   81       648        0.02154   2.676                 0.3128         1.434
                          10 100        900       0.02109   2.718                 0.3198         1.420
                          11 121       1210       0.02074   2.781                 0.3346         1.394
                          12 144       1584       0.02045   2.773                 0.3274         1.403
                          13 169       2028       0.02020   2.803                 0.3332         1.392
                          14 196       2548       0.02000   2.827                 0.3378         1.383
                          15 225       3150       0.01982   2.842                 0.3399         1.380
                          16 256       3840       0.01967   2.872                 0.3476         1.368
For the irrationality criteria to apply, the entries in the last column must tend to a limit ą 1, and those
                                                                                           1{e            .
of the second last column ă 1. The bound of lemma 7.6, applied to (9.12) yields log dn n ď 10      3 “ 3.3
(see below for an improvement). However, we find that the product of the least common multiple of
                                                              26
the denominators in each row of Qn is consistently and significantly larger than the true denominator
of the determinant. Notice that the values tn are decreasing which suggests that the squared supremal
transfinite diameter is ă 0.01967 (column headed t2n ).
Proposition 9.3. We have the bound pSuprec        2
                                       p1,1q pτ qq ă 0.023

Proof. Consider the image of the region τ (9.11) under the map ϕ. It satisfies
                                              Tmin Ă ϕpτ q Ă Tmax
where Tmin , Tmax are the triangles depicted in figure 1. Since
                             Suphom pTmin q ď Suphom pϕpτ qq ď Suphom pTmax q
we deduce from (5.11) that
                           ˆ           ˙2                       ˆ           ˙2
                             volpTmin q 3        hom              volpTmax q 3
                   0.017 ă                ď Supp1,1q pτ q ď                    ă 0.023
                                2 e2                                 2 e2
The inequalities follow by computing the areas of T1 , T2 ; the statement from proposition 6.2.           □
   Experiments suggest that the square of the transfinite diameter is slightly smaller than the average
0.02 and significantly smaller than our upper bound 0.023. Indeed, from figure 1 we see that there is a
considerable amount of daylight between the lower part of the black curve and the outer triangle.




        Figure 1. The region ϕpτ q is bounded by the y-axis and the black curve. The top part
        of this curve is the image of upv ` 1q2 “ pv ´ 1q2 under the map x “ uv, y “ u ` v;
        the bottom is given by the parabola y 2 “ 4x. The region ϕpτ q is visibly contained in a
        large blue triangle Tmax , whose vertices are p0, 0q, p0, 1.05q, p0.098, 0.653q, and contains
        a smaller blue triangle Tmin whose vertices are p0, 0.25q, p0, 0.99q, p0.0885, 0.63q.


9.3.2. Denominators. A modest improvement of the denominator estimate may be obtained by changing
basis of Mn , which does not change its determinant. One way to do this is to replace f1 , f2 with
                            g1 “ 1 ´ f1 “ u3      and         g2 “ 1 ` f2 “ u1 ` u5 .
A monomial g1a g2b   is a linear combination of ua3 ui1 uj5  where i ` j “ b, whose vector of poles (9.4) is
p “ pa ´ j, a ´ i, j, b ´ a, iq. Its two maxima are bounded above by
                                               #
                                                pa, maxtb, a ´ 2b uq if a ě b,
                                  pm1 , m2 q “
                                                pb, maxta, b ´ auq if b ě a
for all i, j. Define Ln (resp. Rn ) to be the diagonal matrix whose entry corresponding to the basis
element g1a g2b is given by dmaxtb,a´b{2u`n (resp. dmaxta,a´bu`n ). Then it follows from a short computation
and (9.3) that Ln Qn Rn has entries which are integral linear combinations of 1, ζp2q. Using the fact that
               ÿ                               19 3         ÿ                     b          29 3
                      maxta ` n, b ´ a ` nu „     n ,             maxtb ` n, a ´ ` nu „         n ,
             0ďa,băn
                                               12         0ďa,băn
                                                                                  2          18

and that en „ n3 by (9.10), we conclude that
                                  ˆ          ˙
                                          1
                                         eN    19 29     115       .
                           lim sup logpdN q ď     `    “     “ 3.194 .
                              N                12   18    36
                                                        27
It seems likely that one could reduce this further, since the estimates used above are not optimal.

9.4. Variant: two copies. Let Mn Ă OpMδ0,5 q be as in (9.9) and now consider the direct sum
                                               Mn ‘ u1 Mn
where we recall from (9.2) that u1 is the function x. The exponent en “ 2n2 pn ´ 1q is defined to be
exactly double the previous example (9.10). We obtain:
                                                              1{e           1{e
                           n   rank en          t2n  log dn n         t2n dn n     ϑn
                           2     8    8      0.01312   2.022          0.0991      2.143
                           3    18   36      0.01625   2.554          0.2089      1.613
                           4    32   96      0.01707   2.571          0.2233      1.583
                           5    50   200     0.01738   2.740          0.2691      1.479
                           6    72   360     0.01752   2.732          0.2690      1.480
                           7    98   588     0.01759   2.802          0.2897      1.446
                           8    128 896      0.01762   2.845          0.3032      1.420
                           9    162 1296     0.01764   2.862          0.3088      1.411
The third column is bounded above by the square of the supremal transfinite diameter, by corollary 5.7.
Notice that the entries in this column are now increasing and seem to converge more quickly than the
previous example. They are consistent with the upper bound of proposition 9.3.

9.5. The five-parameter family. We now consider the five-parameter family
                                       pu1 , . . . , u5 q : Mδ0,5 ÝÑ A5 .
The anciliary image variety is exactly the scheme Mδ0,5 of dimension 2, embedded naturally in A5 , and
the region σ “ σ δ is defined by ui ě 0.
   We now take the full affine ring M “ OpMδ0,5 q viewed as a Z-module. We may filter M by the
maximum of the vector of poles (9.4).
Lemma 9.4. We have the isomorphism of Z-modules
                                         à      à
(9.14)                     Mn “ Z ‘               uai ubi`1 Z .
                                              a`bďn,aą0 i mod 5

Proof. We outline the main ideas. First check that OpMδ0,5 q Ă i,a,b uai ubi`1 Z by successively applying
                                                                    ř

the dihedral relations (9.5) to any monomial in the ui ’s to replace ui´1 ui`1 with 1 ´ ui . Since this
decreases the total degree in the ui , this process terminates when it can be applied no more, namely
to monomials which only involve ui , uj where i, j are consecutive modulo 5. To show independence of
the generators on the right-hand side of (9.14), compute the pole vector (9.4) of uh1 ui2 which equals
pi, ´h, ´i, h, h ` iq. The divisor E at infinity (9.6) has 5 irreducible components E1 , . . . , E5 which are
simple normal crossing and form a pentagon. We deduce from the geometric interpretation of the pole
vectors [Bro09] that uai ubi`1 has poles of order a, a ` b, b along three consecutive such edges which are
uniquely determined by the index i, and no pole along the other two. This is enough information to
establish independence, which is left as an exercise.                                                      □

  The Poincaré series for the associated graded module gr M is given by
                                 1 ` 3t ` t2
(9.15)                                       “ 1 ` 5t ` 10t2 ` 15t3 ` . . . .
                                   p1 ´ tq2
Example 9.5. M1 has dimension 6 and has the basis t1, u1 , . . . , u5 u. The corresponding matrix is
                  ¨ ş         ş            ş           ş             ş           ş         ˛
                      σ
                        ω        u ω
                               σ 1
                                              u ω
                                             σ 2
                                                          u ω
                                                         σ 3
                                                                        u ω
                                                                       σ 4
                                                                                    u ω
                                                                                  σ 5
                  ˚ş          ş 2        ş           ş             ş           ş           ‹
                  ˚ u1 ω         u ω         u u ω σ u1 u3 ω σ u1 u4 ω σ u1 u5 ω ‹
                  ˚σ           σ 1        σ 1 2                                            ‹
                  ˚ş        ş              ş 2       ş             ş           ş           ‹
              σ
                  ˚ u2 ω
                  ˚σ            u u ω
                             σ 1 2
                                              u ω
                                             σ 2
                                                         u u ω σ u2 u4 ω σ u2 u5 ω ‹
                                                       σ 2 3
             Q1 “ ˚ş
                                                                                           ‹
                            ş            ş             ş 2         ş           ş           ‹
                  ˚ u3 ω        u 1 u3 ω     u2 u3 ω      u  ω         u3 u4 ω     u3 u5 ω ‹
                  ˚σ         σ            σ              σ 3         σ          σ          ‹
                  ˚ş        ş            ş           ş               ş 2       ş           ‹
                  ˚ u4 ω        u u ω σ u2 u4 ω σ u3 u4 ω               u ω        u u ω‹
                  ˝σ         σ 1 4                                     σ 4      σ 4 5 ‚
                    ş       ş            ş           ş             ş             ş 2
                      u ω σ u1 u5 ω σ u2 u5 ω σ u3 u5 ω σ u4 u5 ω
                     σ 5
                                                                                    u ω
                                                                                   σ 5
                                                      28
By performing the integrals we find that
                    ¨                                                                                                       ˛
                      ζp2q       1           1          1                                      1                 1
                    ˚            3           1                                                                   1
                                                                                                                   ‹
                    ˚ 1                             ´1 ` ζp2q                           ´1 ` ζp2q                  ‹
                    ˚            4           2                                                                   2 ‹
                    ˚            1           3          1
                                                                                                                   ‹
                    ˚ 1                                                                 ´1 ` ζp2q         ´1 ` ζp2q‹
               σ                 2           4          2
             Q1 “ ˚
                    ˚                                                                                              ‹
                                             1          3                                      1
                                                                                                                   ‹
                    ˚ 1     ´1 ` ζp2q                                                                     ´1 ` ζp2q‹
                    ˚                        2          4                                      2                   ‹
                    ˚                                   1                                      3              1
                                                                                                                   ‹
                    ˚ 1     ´1  `  ζp2q  ´1 `  ζp2q                                                                ‹
                    ˝                                   2                                      4              2    ‚
                                          1                                                    1                 3
                            1             2          ´1 ` ζp2q            ´1 ` ζp2q            2                 4

Observe that the matrix Qσ1 has a large proportion of entries which are rational, i.e., for which the
coefficient of ζp2q vanishes. This arises whenever the corresponding pole vector (9.4) has a negative term
(see [Bro16] for a cohomological interpretation). By dihedral symmetry of the coordinates u1 , . . . , u5 the
matrix Qσ1 evidently satisfies P T Qσ1 P for any permutation matrix P which preserves the first column and
acts as a dihedral symmetry on columns 2, . . . , 6. Consequently, the determinant, viewed as a function
of x “ ζp2q has the curious factorization:
                                         1
                                detpQσ1 q “ p8x2 ´ x ´ 20qp16x2 ´ 44x ` 29q2
                                       1024
Notice that these factors already occurred as the determinant of a 4ˆ4 matrix for the 2-parameter family
for ζp2q (see (9.13)), which involved more complicated-looking linear forms in ζp2q. The factorisation of
the determinant of Qσn also arises for higher n; the precise structure is interesting and warrants further
investigation. Substituting x “ ζp2q we find that detpQσ1 q „ 1.059 ˆ 10´8 .
Example 9.6. The module M2 has the basis
                 m “ p1, u1 , u2 , u3 , u4 , u5 , u1 u2 , u2 u3 , u3 u4 , u4 u5 , u5 u1 , u21 , u22 , u23 , u24 , u25 q .
Then the resulting 16 ˆ 16 matrix has a determinant of order 10´49 and denominator 245 330 . Its
determinant, as a polynomial in ζp2q once again factorises as a polynomial of degree 4 and 6 (the latter
with multiplicity two).
9.5.1. Supremal transfinite diameter. Recall the definition of f1 , f2 (9.8). We may show that
                                                   à i
(9.16)                                Mn “ Z ‘           ρ pu1 Rn q
                                                                    iPZ{5Z

where Rn “ Zrf1 f2 , f1 ` f2 shom
                              n   and ρ is the cyclic symmetry ui ÞÑ ui`1 where i, i ` 1 P Z{5Z. Let
                                                       3
R “ n Rn . Since the exponent function of Rn is „ n3 by (5.4) it is natural, in view of remark 5.11, to
     À
define the exponent of Mn to be the total degree in the ui with respect to the basis (9.14)
                                                           5
(9.17)                                           eM
                                                  n “        npn ` 1qp2n ` 1q .
                                                           6
The supremal transfinite diameter can then be estimated from corollary 5.12. Thus, since eM   R
                                                                                          n {en „
5 1
3 { 3 “ 5 and Mn is essentially a direct sum of 5 copies of Rn , we deduce that

                                         SupM pσq ď SupR pσq “ Suphom pϕpτ qq
where the second equality follows from Rn “ ϕ˚ Zrf1 , f2 shom
                                                          n   and functoriality (4.4), and where ϕpτ q is
the region discussed in proposition 9.3. We deduce from the upper bound that
(9.18)                                   SupM pσq2 ă p0.023q3{2 “ 0.003488 . . .
                                                                                3
We expect that this upper bound should be closer to p0.02q 2 „ 0.0028.

9.5.2. Denominator bounds. Consider the basis of Mn given in (9.14). A term in the matrix Qσn is
equivalent, by dihedral symmetry, to an integral with integrand ua1 ub2 uci udi`1 ω where i P Z{5Z and
a ` b, c ` d ď n. The pole vector can be computed for each value of i, and its maximum is attained
when i “ 1, leading to a largest pole of order a ` b ` c ` d. The second maximum is attained when i “ 2
(or i “ 5), in which case it is a ` c ` d (or b ` c ` d). Thus we may bound the two successive maxima
m2 ď m1 , solely as functions of a, b, by
                                     m1 ď a ` b ` n             ,     m2 ď maxta, bu ` n .
                                                                     29
An elementary computation yields
                       ÿ                        5 3                     ÿ                              3 3
                               a`b`n„             n      and                       maxta, bu ` n „       n .
                     0ďa,bďn
                                                6                     0ďa,bďn
                                                                                                       4

Since (9.14) is a direct sum over 5 such copies, the relevant factor is 5p 65 ` 34 q “ 95
                                                                                       12 and in total that the
denominator is (crudely) bounded by
                                           ˆ          ˙ e1            ˆ        ˙
                                               95 3      n                19
(9.19)                         lim exp            n          “ exp                 “ expp4.75q ,
                                n              12                          4

since eM   5 3
       n „ 3 n . This bound is based on the least common multiple of the denominators of row entries.
Experiments suggest that the actual denominator is considerably smaller.

9.5.3. Experimental estimates. Numerical computations yield the following results:
                                                                          1{e           1{e
                           n rank           en           tn   log dn n               tn dn n    ϑn
                           1   6             5        0.02541   2.843                 0.436    1.29
                           2   16           25        0.01095   2.638                 0.153    1.711
                           3   31           70        0.00724   2.894                 0.130    1.703
                           4   51          150        0.00563   3.450                 0.177    1.501
                           5   76          275        0.00475   3.536                 0.163    1.513
                           6 106            455       0.00421   3.703                 0.171    1.477
                           7 141            700       0.00384   3.884                 0.186    1.432
                           8 181           1020       0.00357   3.926                 0.181    1.435
                           9 226           1425       0.00337   3.995                 0.183    1.425
                           10 276          1925       0.00321   4.068                 0.188    1.411
                           11 331          2539       0.00309   4.037                 0.175    1.432

Note that because of the large size of the matrices, we could not compute the denominators for large n
exactly, but estimated them. The data is entirely consistent with the bounds established above. The
final two columns need to be ă 1 and ą 1 respectively for an irrationality proof. It is not clear what to
expect of the limit of the thresholds ϑn , but they seem to compare very favorably with ϑclassical “ 1.203..
for the classical irrationality criterion, and the threshold ϑ1 “ 1.264.. for the 1-dimensional determinant
method (which is already a significant improvement on the classical one).

9.5.4. Closing remarks. We did not exploit the dihedral symetries in the above analysis. It would be
interesting to perform similar computations for the supremal transfinite diameter for the much smaller
module M “ OpMδ0,5 qD10 consisting of dihedrally-invariant functions.

Remark 9.7. The p-adic zeta value ζp p2q vanishes, and hence the p-adic version Qpn of the matrices QdRn
(see §8.2.1) have only rational entries. The denominator of their determinant is very slightly smaller
than the one for Qσn but negligeably so, and therefore one expects that in the limit, the denominator can
be computed from the p-adic valuation of the p-adic realisation of QdRn . Thus, we expect that
                                                   ź           1{e
                                          δn1{en „   |det Qpn |p n
                                                             p

which suggests an interpretation of criterion 1.4 in the form:
                                           ´            ź             ¯ e1
                                                      2                  n
(9.20)                              lim sup |det Qσn |    |det Qpn |p      ă1
                                       n                         p



         Appendix A. Vandermonde determinants for tensor products of modules
  In this appendix we recall a formula [Bro25] for the generalised Vandermonde determinant of a tensor
product of finite-rank free modules.
                                                                 30
A.0.1. Amalgams of matrices. Let m, n ě 1 and consider a matrix with mn rows and m columns:
                                ¨                          ˛ ¨       ˛
                                  a11     a12   . . . a1m         a1
                                ˚ a21     a22   . . . a2m ‹‹ ˚ a2 ‹
                                                               ˚     ‹
(A.1)                      A“˚ .
                                ˚
                                           .            .    “˚ . ‹
                                ˝ ..       ..           .. ‚ ˝ .. ‚
                                                           ‹

                                 amn 1 amn 2 . . . amn m         amn

with entries aij in a commutative ring R, and where ai “ pai1 . . . aim q P Rm denotes the ith row vector.
Likewise, consider the matrix with mn rows and n columns
                                  ¨                          ˛ ¨           ˛
                                      b11   b12   . . . b1n             b1
                                  ˚ b21     b22   . . . b2n ‹‹ ˚ b2 ‹
                                                                     ˚     ‹
(A.2)                         B“˚ .
                                  ˚
                                              .          .       “˚ . ‹
                                  ˝ ..        ..         .. ‚ ˝ .. ‚
                                                             ‹

                                                      bmn 1       bmn 2       ...   bmn n             bmn

with entries bij P R, and bi “ pbi1 . . . bin q P Rn denotes the ith row.

Definition A.1. Define their amalgamated matrix product:
                                            ¨            ˛
                                                a1 b b1
                                            ˚ a2 b b2 ‹
                                    A‹B “˚
                                            ˚            ‹
                                                   ..    ‹
                                            ˝       .    ‚
                                               amn b bmn

It is a square matrix with mn rows and columns, and entries in R.

   Our convention for the Kronecker tensor product of two row vectors is:

    pa1 , . . . , am q b pb1 , . . . , bn q “ pa1 b1 , a2 b1 , . . . , am b1 , looooooooooomooooooooooon
                                               looooooooooomooooooooooon       a1 b2 , a2 b2 , . . . , am b2 , . . . , a 1 bn , a2 bn , . . . , am bn q
                                                                                                                       loooooooooooomoooooooooooon
                                                              abb1                          abb2                                  abbn

where we write commas between entries for legibility and a “ pa1 , . . . , am q. This convention applies to
every row in the definition of A ‹ B. The Kronecker product of two matrices is a special case.

Example A.2. Let m “ 3 and n “ 2, and consider the matrices
                             ¨               ˛           ¨                                                    ˛
                              a11 a12 a13                  b11                                            b12
                             ˚a21 a22 a23 ‹              ˚b21                                             b22 ‹
                             ˚               ‹           ˚                                                    ‹
                             ˚a31 a32 a33 ‹              ˚b31                                             b32 ‹
                        A“˚  ˚               ‹   , B“˚                                                        ‹
                              a
                             ˚ 41   a42  a43 ‹
                                             ‹           ˚b41
                                                         ˚                                                b42 ‹
                                                                                                              ‹
                             ˝a51 a52 a53 ‚              ˝b51                                             b52 ‚
                              a61 a62 a63                  b61                                            b62

Then
                                    ¨                                                                                  ˛
                                     a11 b11                  a12 b11     a13 b11     a11 b12       a12 b12    a13 b12
                                    ˚a21 b21                  a22 b21     a23 b21     a21 b22       a22 b22    a23 b22 ‹
                                    ˚                                                                                  ‹
                                    ˚a31 b31                  a32 b31     a33 b31     a31 b32       a32 b32    a33 b32 ‹
                               A‹B “˚
                                    ˚a41 b41
                                                                                                                       ‹
                                    ˚                         a42 b41     a43 b41     a41 b42       a42 b42    a43 b42 ‹
                                                                                                                       ‹
                                    ˝a51 b51                  a52 b51     a53 b51     a51 b52       a52 b52    a53 b52 ‚
                                     a61 b61                  a62 b61     a63 b61     a61 b62       a62 b62    a63 b62
In particular, if
                                                   ¨                        ˛            ¨               ˛
                                                    1           x1      x21               1          y1
                                                   ˚1           x2      x22 ‹            ˚1          y2 ‹
                                               A “ ˚.                    .. ‹ ,      B “ ˚.
                                                   ˚                        ‹            ˚               ‹
                                                                 ..                                   .. ‹
                                                   ˝ ..           .       .‚             ˝ ..          .‚
                                                          1     x6      x26                     1    y6
                           rec
Then A ‹ B is the matrix Vp3,2q pz1 , . . . , z6 q considered above.
                                                                              31
A.0.2. A formula for the determinant of an amalgam. Consider the trivial Young tableau 1nm of shape
nm consisting of m rows and n columns in which the numbers 1, . . . , mn are placed from top to bottom
and left to right, in that order. Thus the first column consists of the numbers 1, . . . , m read from top to
bottom; the second m ` 1, . . . , 2m, etc. The symmetric group Σmn acts on its entries by permutation.
  Consider the tableau α “ σp1nm q, where σ P Σmn . Let us write
                                   n
                                   ź                             źn
                            Aσ “      det Acoli pαq and Bσ “         det Browi pαq
                                 i“1                                 i“1
where, for any subset I Ă t1, . . . , mnu, AI is the square submatrix of A with rows indexed by I, and
similarly for B; and coli pαq (resp. rowi pαq) denotes the ith row (resp. column) of α. The following
theorem is a special case of [Bro25, Theorem 3.8].
Theorem A.3. Let A, B and m, n be as above and let
                                                      n´1
                                                      ź   pm ` iq!
(A.3)                                     Hm,n “                   .
                                                      i“0
                                                             i!
Then
                                                  1         ÿ
                                 detpA ‹ Bq “                    εpσqAσα Bσβ .
                                                Hm,n σPΣ
                                                            mn




                                                       32
                            Appendix B. Fast computation of Iph, i, j, k, lq
   The following method leads to very fast computation of the matrices Qσ discussed in §9.

B.1. Contiguity matrices. Consider the de Rham cohomology group which underlies the family of
Mellin integrals Ips1 , . . . , s5 q defined by (9.1), namely
                                                2
                                         MdR “ HdR pM0,5 {k; pO, ∇qq
over the field k “ Qps1 , . . . , s5 q, where O is the structure sheaf of M0,5 and
                                                          5
                                                          ÿ         dui
                                               ∇“d`            si
                                                         i“1
                                                                    ui
where ui are given by (9.2). By a method to be explained elsewhere, we can easily compute the space
MdR by computing the iterated higher direct images of the algebraic vector bundle with integrable
connection pO, ∇q relative to the two maps px, yq ÞÑ y : M0,5 Ñ M0,4 and M0,4 Ñ M0,3 – Spec Q,
where M0,4 – P1 zt0, 1, 8u has the affine coordinate y. We verify that MdR has rank 2 with basis given
by the cohomology classes of the forms
                                            dxdy
                                    ω1 “                and           ω0 “ dxdy .
                                           1 ´ xy
For each 1 ď i ď 5, define the shift operator Ti : MdR Ñ MdR which is induced by multiplication by ui
on ω0 , ω1 . In this basis they are represented explicitly by 2 ˆ 2 matrices we denote by Mi psq P M2ˆ2 pkq.
They are easily computed in Maple and given explicitly below. One checks the relation:
(B.1)                                   Mi pτi sqMj psq “ Mj pτj sqMi psq
for all 1 ď i, j ď 5, where s “ ps1 , . . . , s5 q and τi is the operator which replaces si with si ` 1. It follows
that for a generic 5-tuple s “ ps1 , . . . , s5 q P R5 and s1 “ τ5 s such that the integrals converge one has:
                                             ˆ          ˙           ˆ       ˙
                                               Ipτi sq                Ipsq
(B.2)                                                     “ M i psq           .
                                               Ipτi s1 q              Ips1 q
To compute Iph, i, j, k, lq for integer values of h, i, j, k, l, we simply compose the matrices Mi , specialised
to integer values of si , in a suitable order, and apply them to the initial vector of periods
                                            ˆż         ż       ˙T ˆ        ˙
                                                                       ζp2q
                                       v“        ω1 ,      ω0      “
                                               σ         σ              1
   Note that since the matrices Mi have poles in the si , some care must be taken regarding the order in
which they are composed (see below), but (B.1) ensures that the answer is independent of the order taken
(provided it avoids poles). This is very similar to the approach in [WLK` 25], where a set of matrices
Mi are derived from hypergeometric functions and is presumably equivalent in this case.

B.2. Explicit formulae for the matrices Mi psq. Our computer code produces:
                   ˆ                                                        ˙
            1           p1 ` a3 q pa5 ´ a1 q          p1 ` a3 q a2
M1 “
      a4 p1 ` a3 q pa1 ` a4 ´ a5 q pa5 ´ 1q p1 ´ a1 ` a2 q a4 ´ a2 pa5 ´ 1q
             ˆ                                      ˙
        1      pa1 ´ a2 q a4 ` a3 pa5 ´ a1 q a2 a3
M2 “
      a4 a5         pa1 ` a4 ´ a5 q a5       ´a2 a5
             ˆ                                      ˙
        1      pa4 ´ a3 q a1 ` a2 pa5 ´ a4 q a2 a3
M3 “
      a1 a5         pa1 ` a4 ´ a5 q a5       ´a3 a5
                   ˆ                                                        ˙
            1           p1 ` a2 q pa5 ´ a4 q          p1 ` a2 q a3
M4 “
      a1 p1 ` a2 q pa1 ` a4 ´ a5 q pa5 ´ 1q pa3 ´ a4 ` 1q a1 ´ a3 pa5 ´ 1q
                          ˆ                                                                                ˙
                1                      0                              p1 ` a3 q p1 ` a2 q
M5 “
      p1 ` a2 qp1 ` a3 q pa1 ` a4 ´ a5 q pa5 ´ 1q pa4 ´ a5 ` 1q pa2 ` 1q ` pa1 ´ a5 ` 1q a3 ` p1 ´ a4 q a1
where the ai are the pole vectors pi`1 ` 1:
                             a1 “ s3 ` s4 ´ s1 ` 1 , . . . , a5 “ s2 ` s3 ´ s5 ` 1 .
The matrices Mi can be used to compute Ipn1 , n2 , n3 , n4 , n5 q for ni ě 0 recursively starting from
pn1 , . . . , n5 q “ p0, 0, 0, 0, 0q provided that there always exists an index i such that Mi pn1 , . . . , n5 q is
finite (work backwards by induction). This is always possible: if the index 1 ď i ď 5 satisfies
                                                        33
si “ maxts1 , . . . , s5 u then ai`2 , ai`3 ą 0, where indices are mod 5, and so Mi is finite by inspection of
the formulae above.
Example B.1. We obtain Ip0, 0, 1, 0, 1q “ ζp2q ´ 1 by first applying M3 to v, and then applying M5 :
                                                   ˆ     ˙ˆ      ˙ˆ     ˙ ˆ             ˙
                                                     0 1   0 1      ζp2q       ζp2q ´ 1
           M5 p0, 0, 1, 0, 0qM3 p0, 0, 0, 0, 0q v “ 1                     “       1
                                                     2 0   1 ´1      1            2
via two applications of (B.2) and the definition of v.
Remark B.2. The contiguity operator with respect to shifting all parameters s1 , . . . , s5 simultaneously,
is similarly a 2 ˆ 2 matrix which is easily computed. If we restrict it to the ‘diagonal’ case s1 “ s2 “
. . . “ s5 “ n we obtain the matrix with determinant ´pn ` 1q2 pn ` 2q´2 given explicitly by
                                     ˜                          ¸
                                           ´3            5
                                       5n2 `13n`8     2            .
                                         pn`2q2   ´ 8n pn`2q
                                                        `21n`13
                                                             2


It enables us to recover the Apéry recurrence for the sequence Ipn, . . . , nq.

                                                         References
[And83]   C. Andréief. Note sur une relation entre les intégrales définies des produits des fonctions. Mémoires de la Société
          des Sciences Physiques et Naturelles de Bordeaux, 2:1–14, 1883.
[Ape79]   Roger Apery. Irrationalité de ζp2q et ζp3q. In Luminy Conference on Arithmetic, number 61 in Astérisque,
          pages 11–13. 1979.
[BB18]    Andrew Bakan and Christian Berg. Solvability of the Hankel determinant problem for real sequences. In Fron-
          tiers in orthogonal polynomials and q-series, volume 1 of Contemp. Math. Appl. Monogr. Expo. Lect. Notes,
          pages 85–117. World Sci. Publ., Hackensack, NJ, 2018.
[BBL18]   T. Bayraktar, T. Bloom, and N. Levenberg. Pluripotential theory and convex bodies. Sb. Math., 209(3):352–384,
          2018.
[BC99]    Thomas Bloom and Jean-Paul Calvi. On the multivariate transfinite diameter. Ann. Polon. Math., 72(3):285–
          305, 1999.
[Beu79]   F. Beukers. A note on the irrationality of ζp2q and ζp3q. Bull. London Math. Soc., 11(3):268–272, 1979.
[Bos89]   Len Bos. A characteristic of points in r2 having lebesgue function of polynomial growth. Journal of Approxi-
          mation Theory, 56(3):316–329, 1989.
[Bro09]   Francis Brown. Multiple zeta values and periods of moduli spaces M0,n pRq. Annales Sci. Ecole Norm. Sup.,
          42:371, 2009.
[Bro16]   Francis Brown. Irrationality proofs for zeta values, moduli spaces and dinner parties. Mosc. J. Comb. Number
          Theory, 6(2-3):102–165, 2016.
[Bro17]   F. Brown. Notes on motivic periods. Commun. Number Theory Phys., 11(3):557–655, 2017.
[Bro25]   Francis Brown. Multivariable vandermonde determinants, amalgams of matrices and specht modules. Journal
          of Algebra, 678:253–278, 2025.
[CM17]    David A. Cox and Sione Ma‘u. Transfinite diameter on complex algebraic varieties. Pacific J. Math., 291(2):279–
          317, 2017.
[DR07]    Laura DeMarco and Robert Rumely. Transfinite diameter and the resultant. J. Reine Angew. Math., 611:145–
          161, 2007.
[Jed91]   Mieczyslaw Jedrzejowski. The homogeneous transfinite diameter of a compact subset of CN . In Proceedings of
          the Tenth Conference on Analytic Functions (Szczyrk, 1990), volume 55, pages 191–205, 1991.
[LS91]    F. Loeser and C. Sabbah. Équations aux différences finies et déterminants d’intégrales de fonctions multiformes.
          Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici, 66(1):458–503, 1991.
[LW21]    Norman Levenberg and Franck Wielonsky. On transfinite diameters in Cd for generalized notions of degree.
          Math. Scand., 127(2):337–360, 2021.
[Ma‘11]   S. Ma‘u. Chebyshev constants and transfinite diameter on algebraic curves in C2 . Indiana Univ. Math. J.,
          60(5):1767–1796, 2011.
[Pow82]   S.C. Power. Finite rank multivariable hankel forms. Linear Algebra and its Applications, 48:237–244, 1982.
[RV96]    Georges Rhin and Carlo Viola. On a permutation group related to ζp2q. Acta Arith., 77(1):23–56, 1996.
[RV01]    Georges Rhin and Carlo Viola. The group structure for ζp3q. Acta Arith., 97(3):269–293, 2001.
[SS62]    M. Schiffer and J. Siciak. Transfinite diameter and analytic continuation of functions of two complex variables.
          In Studies in mathematical analysis and related topics, pages 341–358. Stanford University Press, 1962.
[TB12]    N. Levenberg T. Bloom, L. Bos. The transfinite diameter of the real ball and simplex. Annales Polonici
          Mathematici, 106(1):83–96, 2012.
[WLK` 25] Shachar Weinbaum, Elyasheev Leibtag, Rotem Kalisch, Michael Shalyt, and Ido Kaminer. On conservative
          matrix fields: Continuous asymptotics and arithmetic, 2025.
[Zah75]   V. P. Zaharjuta. Transfinite diameter, Čebyšev constants and capacity for a compactum in C n . Mat. Sb. (N.S.),
          pages 374–389, 503, 1975.
[Zud17]   Wadim Zudilin. A determinantal approach to irrationality. Constr. Approx., 45(2):301–310, 2017.

   University of Oxford, Radcliffe Observatory, Andrew Wiles Building, Woodstock Rd, Oxford, United
Kingdom, OX2 6GG
   Email address: francis.brown@all-souls.ox.ac.uk
                                                                34
