  The embedded spheres (and related diffeomorphisms and metrics) constructed in this paper
to illustrate 1-stability all live in the family of completely decomposable 4-manifolds

                                     Xp,q :“ pCP2 # qCP2

obtained from S 4 by p positive and q negative blowups.


  Theorem A. If p ě 4 is even and q ě 5p, then Xp,q contains an infinite family tSk | k ě 0u
of topologically isotopic embedded 2-spheres that are pairwise strictly 1-stably isotopic, i.e.
smoothly isotopic in Xp,q # S 2 ˆS 2 but not in Xp,q . For q ě 9, X2,q contains a pair S, T of
topologically isotopic spheres that are strictly 1-stably isotopic


   In fact all the spheres we construct have self-intersection `1, and their blowdowns have
distinct Seiberg-Witten invariants. Hence they are not only smoothly nonisotopic, but a fortiori
smoothly inequivalent, i.e. no diffeomorphism of Xp,q carries any one to any other.
   Our examples arise naturally, illustrating a close relation between 1-stable equivalence of
manifolds modulo CP2 and inequivalence of spheres of self-intersection `1: Start with a pair of
4-manifolds X –1 Y (mod CP2 ), i.e. X fl Y but X ` – Y ` . Let S be the exceptional sphere in
X ` , and T be the image of the exceptional sphere in Y ` under any diffeomorphism Y ` Ñ X ` .
Then S and T are inequivalent in X ` . The harder task is to produce examples that are strictly
1-stably isotopic, i.e. isotopic in X ` # S 2 ˆS 2 (also see Section 1 below). We accomplish this by
localizing our construction: There are pairs of strictly 1-stably isotopic spheres in the blowup
W ` of a certain contractible 4-manifold W , the Akbulut-Mazur cork (see Section 3) which has
the needed properties to produce the infinite family of spheres in Theorem A. In fact, W is the
first of an infinite family of corks with these same properties, each producing infinite families
of spheres (see Section 3). To extend the result when p “ 2 to produce an infinite family of
spheres, it would be sufficient to find a suitable embedding of such a cork in X1,9 .
   Theorem A extends to a stabilization result for links of spheres in 4-manifolds. The links we
find come in families that satisfy a property reminiscent of Brunnian links [20, 25] in that,
once suitably ordered, all their corresponding proper sublinks are smoothly isotopic. We will
refer to any such family of links as a Brunnian family.


  Theorem B. Fix m ą 1. If p ě 2 is even and q ě 5p ` 2 por q ě 11 when p “ 2q then
Xp`m´1,q contains a Brunnian pair of topologically isotopic m-component ordered links that
are strictly 1-stably isotopic. Furthermore, for p ě 4 there exists an infinite family of smoothly
distinct such m-component links.


   The spheres described in Theorem A in turn lead to examples of strictly 1-stably isotopic
diffeomorphisms by invoking a construction that dates back to early work of Wall [66], or even
earlier in Picard-Lefschetz theory [51]. The key observation is that an embedded sphere Σ of
self-intersection ˘1 or ˘2 in a 4-manifold X gives rise to a diffeomorphism of X, supported
in a neighborhood of Σ, that induces a ‘reflection’ in the second homology. An isotopy of such
2-spheres yields an isotopy of the corresponding diffeomorphisms, by the isotopy extension
theorem. Note that the converse of this statement is not known to be true in general, but it
holds ‘morally’: the non-isotopic diffeomorphisms constructed in [61, 62, 63] are compositions
of such reflections in spheres, and in the end are detected by gauge-theoretic invariants that
also show these spheres to be non-isotopic. Combining these results with Theorem A gives
1-stability of an infinite family of non-isotopic diffeomorphisms.

