                                                          Entropy, Optimization and Counting
                                                              Mohit Singh                                 Nisheeth K. Vishnoi
                                                  Microsoft Research, Redmond, USA                 Microsoft Research, Bangalore, India
                                                    Email: mohits@microsoft.com                    Email: nisheeth.vishnoi@gmail.com




arXiv:1304.8108v1 [cs.DS] 30 Apr 2013
                                                                                          Abstract
                                            In this paper we study the problem of computing max-entropy distributions over a discrete set of
                                        objects subject to observed marginals. Interest in such distributions arises due to their applicability in ar-
                                        eas such as statistical physics, economics, biology, information theory, machine learning, combinatorics
                                        and, more recently, approximation algorithms. A key difficulty in computing max-entropy distributions
                                        has been to show that they have polynomially-sized descriptions. We show that such descriptions exist
                                        under general conditions. Subsequently, we show how algorithms for (approximately) counting the un-
                                        derlying discrete set can be translated into efficient algorithms to (approximately) compute max-entropy
                                        distributions. In the reverse direction, we show how access to algorithms that compute max-entropy
                                        distributions can be used to count, which establishes an equivalence between counting and computing
                                        max-entropy distributions.
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                               3
  1.1 Our Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       4
       1.1.1 Informal Statement of Our Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         5
  1.2 Technical Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       6
  1.3 Organization of the Rest of the Paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      8

2 Preliminaries                                                                                          9
  2.1 Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
  2.2 Combinatorial Polytopes, Separation Oracles, Counting Oracles and Interiority . . . . . . . 9
  2.3 The Maximum Entropy Convex Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
  2.4 Formal Statement of Our Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
  2.5 The Ellipsoid Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

3 Examples of Combinatorial Polytopes                                                                       15

4 New Algorithmic Approaches for the Traveling Salesman Problem                                             16

5 Bounding Box                                                                                              17

6 Optimization via Counting                                                                            18
  6.1 Proof of Theorem 2.6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
  6.2 Proof of Theorem 2.8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

7    Counting via Optimization                                                                              22
    7.1 A Convex Program for Counting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       22
    7.2 The Interior of P(M ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
    7.3 A Separation Oracle for Interiority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
    7.4 The Ellipsoid Algorithm for Theorem 2.11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      25

A Omitted Proofs                                                                                     31
  A.1 Duality of the Max-Entropy Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
  A.2 Optimal and Near-Optimal Dual Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

B Generalized Counting and Minimizing Kullback-Leibler Divergence                                           34

C 2 → 2-norm of ∇ f                                                                                         37




                                                      2
1 Introduction
In this paper we study the computability of max-entropy probability distributions over a discrete set. Con-
sider a collection M of discrete objects whose building blocks are the elements [m] = {1, 2, . . . , m}; thus,
M ⊆ {0, 1}m . Suppose there is some unknown distribution p on M and we are given access to it via observ-
ables θ , the simplest of which is the probability that an element is present in a random sample M from p;
namely, PM←p [e ∈ M] = θe . If θ is all we know, what is our best guess for p? The principle of max-entropy
[17, 18] postulates that the best guess is the distribution which maximizes (Shannon) entropy.1 Roughly,
the argument is that any distribution which has more information must violate some observable, and a dis-
tribution with less information must implicitly use additional independent observables, hence contradicting
their maximality. Access to such a distribution could then be used to obtain samples which conform with
the observed statistics and to obtain the most informed guess to further statistics.
     Given the fundamental nature of such a distribution, it should not be surprising that it shows up in various
areas such as statistical physics, economics, biology, information theory, machine learning, combinatorics
and, more recently, in the design of approximation algorithms, see for instance [26]. From a computational
point of view, the question is how to find max-entropy distributions. Note that the entropy function is
concave, hence, the problem of maximizing it over the set of all probability distributions over M with
marginals θ is a convex programming problem. But what is the input? If θ and M are given explicitly,
then a solution to this convex program can be obtained, using the ellipsoid method, in time polynomial in
|M | and the number of bits needed to represent θ .2 However, in most interesting applications, while θ is
given explicitly, M may be an exponentially-sized set over the universe {0, 1}m and specified implicitly. For
example, the input could be a graph G = (V, E) with m edges and θ ∈ Rm       ≥0 whereas M could be all spanning
trees or all perfect matchings in G; in such a scenario |M | could be exponential in m. This renders the convex
program for computing the max-entropy distribution prohibitively large. Moreover, simply describing the
distribution could require exponential space. The good news is that one can use convex programming duality
to convert the max-entropy program into one that has m variables. Additionally, under mild conditions on
θ , strong duality holds and, hence, the max-entropy distribution is a product distribution, i.e., there exist
γe for e ∈ [m] such that for all M ∈ M , pM ∝ ∏e∈M γe , see [4] or Lemma 2.3. Thus, the max-entropy
distribution for θ can be described by m numbers γ = (γe )e∈[m] . There are two main computational problems
concerning max-entropy distributions. The first is to, given θ and implicit access to M , obtain γ̃ such that
the entropy of the product distribution p̃, corresponding to γ̃ , is close to that of the max-entropy distribution,
and the observables obtained from p̃ are close to θ . The second is, given γ̃ , obtain a random sample from
the distribution p̃. The second problem can be handled by invoking the equivalence between approximate
counting and sampling due to Jerrum, Valiant and Vazirani [22] and, hence, we focus on the first issue of
computing approximations to the max-entropy distributions.3 However, the existence of γ̃ which requires
polynomially-many bits in the input size is, a priori, far from clear. This raises the crucial question of
whether good enough succinct descriptions exist for max-entropy distributions.
     While there is a vast amount of literature concerning the computation of max-entropy distributions (see
for example the survey [37]), previous (partial) results on computing max-entropy distributions required
exploiting some special structure of the particular problem at hand. In theoretical computer science, interest
in rigorously computing max-entropy distributions derives from their applications to randomized rounding
and the design of non-trivial approximation algorithms, notably to problems such as the symmetric and the
asymmetric traveling salesman problem (TSP/ATSP). For example, using a very technical argument, [1]
                                                                                def             1
                                                             M M∈M is H(p) = ∑M∈M pM ln pM .
   1 Recall that the Shannon entropy of a distribution p = (p )
   2 The ellipsoid algorithm requires a bounding ball which in this case is trivial since ∀M ∈ M , 0 ≤ p ≤ 1.
                                                                                                        M
   3 To be precise, this equivalence between random sampling and approximate counting holds when the combinatorial problem at

hand is self-reducible, see also [32].



                                                             3
give an algorithm to compute the max-entropy distribution over spanning trees of a graph. This algorithm
was then used by them to improve the approximation ratio for ATSP, and by [30] to improve the approxi-
mation ratio for (graphical) TSP, making progress on two long-standing problems. Subsequently, the ability
to compute max-entropy distributions over spanning trees has also been used to design efficient privacy
preserving mechanisms for spanning tree auctions by [16]. In another example, [2] show how to compute
max-entropy distributions over perfect matchings in a tree and use it to design approximation algorithms
for a max-min fair allocation problem. The question of computing max-entropy distributions over perfect
matchings in bipartite (and general) graphs, however, has been an important open problem. Recent applica-
tions of the ability to compute max-entropy distribution over perfect matchings in bipartite graphs include
new approaches for TSP and ATSP, see [36] and Section 4.
    For counting problems, it is rare to obtain algorithms that can count exactly, notable exceptions being
the problem of counting spanning trees in a graph [28] or counting certain problems restricted to trees using
dynamic programming. Most natural counting problems turn out to be #P-hard including the problem to
count the number of perfect matchings in a bipartite graph [34, 35]. The goal then shifts to finding algorithms
that approximately count up to any fixed precision [27, 33]. Here the most successful technique has been
the Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method [20] which, when combined with the equivalence between
approximate counting and sampling [22]4 , leads to many approximate counting algorithms. The technique
has been applied to many problems including counting perfect matchings in a bipartite graph [21], counting
bases in a balanced matroid [11], counting solutions to a knapsack problem [6] and counting the number of
colorings in restricted graph families [19]. However, the problem of obtaining approximate counting oracles
for several problems remains open as well; perhaps a prominent example is that of (approximately) counting
the number of perfect matchings in a general graph.
    In combinatorics, max-entropy distributions are often referred to as hard-core or Gibbs distributions and
have been intensely studied. While it is nice that the hard-core distribution has a product form, i.e., pM ∝
∏e∈M γe , the question of interest here is whether one can upper bound the γe s. Structurally, such a bound
implies that hard-core distributions exhibit a significant amount of approximate stochastic independence. In
an important result, [25] proved such a bound for the hard-core distribution over matchings in a graph. This
led to resolving several questions involving asymptotic graph and hypergraph problems. For instance results
of [23, 25, 24] prove that the fractional chromatic index of a graph asymptotically behaves as its chromatic
index. However, the argument of [25] is quite difficult and seems to be specific to the setting of matchings
leaving it an interesting problem to understand under what conditions can one obtain upper bounds on γe s.

1.1 Our Contribution
We first show that good enough succinct representations exist for max-entropy distributions. Subsequently,
we give an algorithm that computes arbitrarily good approximations to max-entropy distributions given θ
and access to a suitable counting oracle for M . Our algorithm is efficient whenever the corresponding count-
ing oracle is efficient. Moreover, the counting oracle can be approximate and/or randomized. This allows
us to leverage a variety of algorithms developed for several #P-hard problems to give algorithms to compute
max-entropy distributions. Consequently, we obtain several new and old results about concrete algorithms to
compute max-entropy distributions. Interesting examples for which we can use pre-existing counting oracles
to obtain max-entropy distributions include spanning trees, matchings in general graphs, perfect matchings
in bipartite graphs (using the algorithm from [21]) and subtrees of a rooted tree. The consequence for perfect
matchings in bipartite graphs makes the algorithmic strategies for TSP/ATSP mentioned earlier computa-
tionally feasible, see Section 4. In the reverse direction we show that if one can solve, even approximately,
    4 We note that MCMC methods efficiently sample (and count) given a fixed γ , usually for γ = 1 corresponding to the uniform

distribution. The goal in our problem is to find an γ that maximizes the entropy. In fact, given a γ , problem specific MCMC methods
can be used to generate a random sample from M according to the product distribution corresponding to γ .


                                                                 4
the convex optimization problem of computing the max-entropy distribution, one can obtain such counting
oracles. This establishes an equivalence between counting and computing max-entropy distributions in a
general setting. As a corollary, we obtain that the problem of computing max-entropy distributions over per-
fect matchings in general graphs is equivalent to the, hitherto unrelated, problem of approximately counting
perfect matchings in a general graph.

1.1.1   Informal Statement of Our Results
Before we describe our results a bit more technically, we introduce some basic notation. For M ⊆ {0, 1}m ,
let P(M ) denote the convex hull of all M where each M ∈ M is thought of as a 0/1 vector of length m,
denoted 1M . Thus, given a θ , for the max-entropy program to have any solution, θ ∈ P(M ). Since we are
concerned with the case when M is given implicitly and may be of exponential size, we no longer hope to
solve the max-entropy convex program directly since that may require exponentially many variables, one for
each M ∈ M . Thus, we work with the dual to the max-entropy convex program. The dual has m variables
and, if θ is in the relative interior of P(M ), the optimal dual solution can be used to describe the optimal
solution to the max-entropy convex program, which is a product distribution. In fact, we assume one can
put a ball of radius η around θ and it still remains in the interior of P(M ). Importantly, our algorithm
requires access to a generalized counting oracle for M , which given γ can compute ∑M∈M , M∋e ∏e′ ∈M γe′
for all e ∈ [m] and also the sum ∑M∈M ∏e∈M γe . We also consider the case when the oracle is approximate
(possibly randomized) and for a given ε , can output the sums above up to a multiplicative error of 1 ± ε .
The following is the first main result of the paper, stated informally here.

Theorem 1.1 (Counting Implies Optimization, See Theorems 2.6 and 2.8) There is an algorithm which,
given access to a generalized (approximate) counting oracle for M ⊆ {0, 1}m , a θ which is promised to
be in the η -interior of P(M ) and an ε > 0, outputs a γ such that its corresponding product probability
distribution p is such that H(p) ≥ (1 − ε/η )H(p⋆ ) and for every e ∈ [m],

                                          |PM←p [e ∈ M] − θe | ≤ ε .

Here, p⋆ is the max-entropy distribution corresponding to θ . The number of calls the algorithm makes to
the oracle is bounded by a polynomial in the input size, ln 1/η and ln 1/ε .

A useful setting for η and ε to keep in mind is 1/m2 and 1/m3 respectively. The bit-lengths of the inputs to the
counting oracle are polynomial in 1/η and, hence, the running time of our algorithm depends polynomially
on 1/η . If the generalized counting oracle is ε -approximate, the same guarantee holds. Note that for many
approximate counting oracles, the dependence on ε on their running time is a polynomial in 1/ε . Hence, in
this case the running time depends polynomially on 1/ε . Finally, note that this result can be easily gener-
alized to obtain algorithms for the problem of finding the distribution that minimizes the Kullback-Leibler
divergence from a given product distribution subject to the marginal constraints, see Remark 2.12.
    At a very high level, the algorithm in this theorem is obtained by applying the framework of the ellipsoid
algorithm to the dual of the max-entropy convex program. While it is more convenient to work with the
dual since it has m variables two issues arise: The domain of optimization becomes unconstrained and the
separation oracle requires the ability to compute (possibly exponential sums) over subsets of M . While
the counting oracles can be adapted to compute exponential sums, the unboundedness of the domain of
optimization is an important problem.
    One of the technical results in the proof of the theorem above is structural and shows that this dual
optimization problem has an optimal solution in a box of size m/η when θ is in the η -interior of P(M ), see
Theorem 2.7. Since γe s are exponential in the respective dual variables, there is an approximation γ̃ to the
optimal solution to the max-entropy program, when θ is in the η -interior of P(M ), such that the number


                                                       5
of bits needed to represent each γ̃e is at most m/η . Such a result has been obtained for the special case of
spanning trees by [1] and for matchings in a general graph by [25].
     Given that counting algorithms for many problems are still elusive, one may ask if they are really nec-
essary to compute max-entropy distributions. The final result of this paper answers this question in the
affirmative and establishes a converse to Theorem 1.1.

Theorem 1.2 (Optimizing Implies Counting, see Theorem 2.11) There is an algorithm, which given or-
acle access to an algorithm to compute an ε -approximation to the max-entropy convex program for an
η -interior point of P(M ), and a separation oracle for P(M ), can compute a number Z such that

                                              (1 − ε )|M | ≤ Z ≤ (1 + ε )|M |.

The number of calls made to the max-entropy oracle is polynomial in the input size and 1/ε .

This result can be extended to obtain generalized counting oracles, see Remark 2.12. For all polytopes
of interest in this paper, separation oracles are known, see Section 3. Moreover, this result continues to
hold even when the separation oracle is approximate, or weak. As a corollary, using a separation oracle for
the perfect matching polytope for general graphs [7, 31], we obtain that an algorithm to compute a good-
enough approximation to the max-entropy distribution for any θ in the perfect matching polytope of a graph
G implies an FPRAS to count the number of perfect matchings in the same graph.

1.2 Technical Overview
The starting point for our results is the following dual to the max-entropy convex program:

                                                inf hλ , θ i + ln ∑ e−hλ ,1M i ,                                  (1)
                                                 λ                M∈M

where 1M is the indicator vector for M. When θ lies in the relative interior of P(M ), then strong duality
holds between the primal and the dual.5 Hence, it follows from the first order conditions on the optimal
solution pair (p⋆ , λ ⋆ ) that p⋆M ∝ e−hλ ,1M i for each M ∈ M . Suppose we know that
                                         ⋆



   1. λ ⋆ is bounded, i.e., kλ ⋆ k ≤ R for some R, and

   2. there is a generalized counting oracle that allows us to compute the gradient of the objective function
       f (λ ) = hλ , θ i + ln ∑M∈M e−hλ ,1M i at a specified λ . The gradient at λ , denoted ∇ f (λ ), turns out to be
              def

      a vector whose coordinate corresponding to e ∈ [m] is

                                                            ∑M∈M , M∋e e−hλ ,1M i
                                                     θe −                         .
                                                             ∑M∈M e−hλ ,1M i

Then, using the machinery of the ellipsoid method, it follows relatively straight-forwardly that, for any ε , we
can compute a point λ ◦ such that f (λ ◦ ) ≤ f (λ ⋆ ) + ε with at most a poly(m, ln 1/ε , ln R) calls to the counting
oracle. Note that since the numbers fed into the counting oracle are of the form e−λe , for each e ∈ [m], the
running time of the counting oracle depends polynomially on R rather than ln R. Thus, we need R to be
polynomially bounded. Hence, the question is:

                                                     Can we bound kλ ⋆ k?
   5 When θ lies on the boundary of P(M ), the infimum in the dual is not attained for any finite λ .




                                                                 6
Indeed, a significant part of the work done in [1] was to bound this quantity for spanning trees and in [25] for
(not necessarily perfect) matchings in graphs. A priori it is not clear why there should be any such bound.
In fact, we observe that if P(M ) lies in some low-dimensional affine space in Rm , the optimal solution is
not unique and can be shifted in any direction normal to the space, see Lemma 2.5. Thus, one can only
hope for the optimal solution to be bounded once one imposes the restriction that λ ⋆ lies in the linear space
corresponding to the affine space in which P(M ) lives. One thing that works in our favor is that we have an
absolute upper bound (independent of θ ) on the optimal value of f (·), namely m. Roughly, this is because at
optimality this quantity is an entropy over a discrete set of size at most 2m . This implies that for all M ∈ M ,

                                           hλ ⋆ , θ i − hλ ⋆ , 1M i ≤ m.                                      (2)
                                                                                            √
Using this, the η -interiority of θ , and the fact that the diameter of P(M ) is at most        m, it can then be
shown that                                                              √
                                                                      m m
                                    max hλ , 1M i − min hλ , 1M i ≤
                                            ⋆                ⋆
                                                                          .
                                   M∈M               M∈M                η
Let us show how this immediately implies a bound on R when M corresponds to all the spanning trees of a
graph with no bridge. Suppose T and T ′ are two trees such that T ′ is obtained from T by deleting an edge e
and adding an edge f , then,
                                                                               √
                                                                              m m
                              |hλ ⋆ , 1T i − hλ ⋆ , 1T ′ i| = |λe⋆ − λ f⋆ | ≤     .
                                                                               η
                                                                      2√
Thus, unless the graph has a bridge, this implies |λe⋆ − λ f⋆ | ≤ m η m for all e, f ∈ G. However, attempting
a similar combinatorial argument for perfect matchings in a bipartite graph, where we do not have this
exchange property, the bound is worse by a factor of 2m .
    Thus, we abandon combinatorial approaches and appeal to the geometric implication of (2) to obtain
the desired polynomial bounding box for all P(M ). The argument is surprisingly simple and we sketch it
                                                       def
here. One way to interpret (2) is that the vector λ ′ = −λ ⋆/m has inner product at most 1 with v − θ for all
v ∈ P(M ). For now, neglecting the fact that P(M ) might live in a lower dimensional affine space and that
0 may not be in P(M ), this implies that λ ′ is in the polar of P(M ). However, since θ is in the η -interior of
P(M ), P(M ) contains an ℓ2 ball of radius at least η inside it. Thus, the polar of P(M ) must be contained
in the polar of this ball, which is nothing but an ℓ2 ball of radius 1/η . This gives a bound of 1/η on the ℓ2
norm of λ ′ and, hence, a bound of m/η on the norm of λ ⋆ as desired.
    Thus, the ellipsoid method can be used to obtain a solution λ ◦ such that f (λ ◦ ) ≤ f (λ ⋆ ) + ε . Why
should this approximate bound imply that the product distribution obtained using λ is close in the marginals
to θ ? The observation here is that f (λ ◦ ) − √ f (λ ) is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the
                                                     ⋆

two distributions. This implies a bound of ε on the marginals using a standard upper bound on the total
variation distance in terms of the KL-divergence.
    In the case when we have access only to an approximate counting oracle for M , things are more com-
plicated. Roughly, the approximate counting oracle translates to having access to an approximate gradient
oracle for the function f (·) and one has to ensure that λ ⋆ is not cut-off during an iteration. Technically, we
show that this does not happen and, hence, approximate counting oracles are equally useful for obtaining
good approximations to max-entropy distributions.
    Finally, note that the (projected-)gradient descent approach (see [29]) can also be shown to converge in
polynomial time and, possibly, can result in practical algorithms for computing max-entropy distributions.
In the case when the counting oracle is approximate, one has to deal with a noisy gradient and the solution
turns out to be similar to the one in the ellipsoid method-based algorithm in the presence of an approximate
counting oracle. In addition to a bound on kλ ⋆ k, one needs to bound the 2 → 2 norm of the gradient of f .


                                                        7
While we omit the details of the gradient descent based-algorithm, we show that k∇ f k2→2 is polynomially
bounded, see Remark 2.9 and Theorem C.1 in Appendix C. This bound may be of independent interest.
    We now give an overview of the reverse direction: How to count approximately given the ability to solve
the max-entropy convex program for any point θ in the η -interior of P(M ). We start by noting that if we
            def
consider θ ⋆ = |M1
                   | ∑M∈M 1M , then the optimal value of the convex program is ln |M |. Thus, given access to
this vertex-centroid of P(M ) one can get an estimate of |M |. However, computing θ ⋆ can be shown to be
as hard as counting |M |, for instance, when M consists of perfect matchings in a bipartite graph, see [10].
We bypass this obstacle and apply the ellipsoid algorithm on the following (convex-programming) problem

                                                 sup inf fθ (λ )
                                                  θ   λ

where fθ (λ ) is the function in (1) and where we have chosen to highlight the dependence on θ . The ellipsoid
algorithm proposes a θ and expects the max-entropy oracle to output an approximate value for infλ fθ (λ ).
This raises a few issues: First, given our result on optimization via counting, it is unfair to assume that we
have such an oracle that works for all θ , irrespective of the interiority of θ in P(M ). Thus, we allow queries
to the oracle only when θ is sufficiently in the interior of P(M ). Note that our algorithm for computing
the max-entropy distribution in our first theorem works under these guarantees. This requires, in addition,
a separation oracle for checking whether a point is in the η -interior of P(M ). We construct such an η -
separation oracle from a separation oracle for P(M ). The latter, given a point, either says it is in P(M ) or
returns an inequality valid for P(M ) but violated by this point.
     The second issue is that θ ⋆ , our target point, may not be in the η -interior of P(M ). In fact, there may
not be any point in the η -interior of P(M ) when η is 1/poly(m). However, under reasonable conditions on
P(M ), which are satisfied for all polytopes we are interested in, we can show that there is a point θ • in the
η -interior of P(M ). This allows us to recover a good enough estimate of |M |. Thus (the way we apply the
framework of ellipsoid algorithm), we are able to recover a point close enough to θ • by doing a binary search
on the target value of |M |. As in the forward direction, because we assume that the max-entropy algorithm
is approximate, we must argue that θ • is not cut-off during any iteration of the ellipsoid algorithm.
     We conclude this overview with a couple of remarks. First, unlike our results in the forward direction,
we cannot replace the ellipsoid method based algorithm by a gradient descent approach. The reason is that
we only have a separation oracle to detect whether a point is in P(M ) or not. Second, we can extend our
result to show that, using a max-entropy oracle, one can obtain generalized approximate counting oracles,
see Remark 2.12.

1.3 Organization of the Rest of the Paper
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we formally define the objects of interest in our
paper including the convex program for optimizing the max-entropy distribution and its dual. We also define
counting oracles that are needed for solving the convex program. We then formally state our results and give
a few lemmas stating properties about the optimal and near-optimal solution to the dual of the max-entropy
convex program. In Section 3 we provide examples of some combinatorial polytopes to which our results
apply. In Section 4, we show how certain algorithmic approaches for approximating the symmetric and the
asymmetric traveling salesman problem are feasible as a result of one of the main results of this paper. In
Section 5, we prove that there is an optimal solution to the dual of the max-entropy convex program that is
contained in a ball of small radius around the origin. In Section 6, we use this bound on the optimal solution
to show that counting oracles, both exact and approximate, can be used to optimize the convex program via
the ellipsoid algorithm. In Section 7, we show the other direction of the reduction and give an algorithm that
can approximately count given an oracle that can approximately solve the max-entropy convex program.
Standard proofs are omitted from the main body and appear in Appendix A. In Appendix B we show how

                                                          8
generalized counting oracles can be obtained via max-entropy oracles. Here, we also introduce the program
for minimizing the KL-divergence with respect to a fixed distribution. Finally, in Appendix C, we give a
bound on k∇ f k2→2 .


2 Preliminaries
2.1 Notation
In this section we introduce the general notation used throughout the paper. Vectors are denoted by plain
letters such as a, b, c, d, x, y, u and v and are over Rm . We also use the Greek letters λ , θ , ν and γ to denote
vectors. 0 is sometimes used to denote the all-zero vector and the usage should be clear from context. For
reasons emanating from applications, we choose to index the set [m] by e. Hence, the components of a
vector are denoted by xe , λe , θe , etc. We also use notation such as x0 , x1 , . . . , xt and λ0 , λ1 , . . . , λt to denote
vectors. It should be clear from the context that these are vectors and not their components. The Greek letters
η , α , β , ε , ζ are used to denote positive real numbers. For a set M ∈ {0, 1}m , let 1M denote the 0/1 indicator
vector for M. We use 1M (e) to denote its e-th component. Thus, 1M (e) = 1 if e ∈ M and 0 otherwise. The
letters p, q and r are reserved to denote probability distributions over {0, 1}m . Of special interest are product
probability distributions where, for M ∈ {0, 1}m , the probability of M is proportional to ∏e∈M γe for some
                                                                                                                            γ
vector γ . We denote such a probability distribution by pγ to emphasize its dependence on γ , and let pM
denote the probability of M. Additionally hx, yi denotes the inner product of two vectors, k · k denotes the
                                 def
Euclidean norm and kxk∞ = maxe∈[m] |xe |. We also use the notation λ (M) to denote hλ , 1M i for a vector λ
and M ∈ {0, 1}m . |S| denotes the cardinality of a set.

2.2 Combinatorial Polytopes, Separation Oracles, Counting Oracles and Interiority
The polytopes of interest arise as convex hulls of subsets of {0, 1}m for some m. For a set M ⊆ {0, 1}m , the
corresponding polytope is denoted by P(M ). Thus,
                                       (                                      )
                                                    ∑ pM 1M : pM ≥ 0, ∑ pM = 1 .
                                            def
                                   P(M ) =
                                                  M∈M                          M∈M

Another way to describe P(M ) is to give a maximal set of linearly independent equalities satisfied by all its
vertices, and to list the inequalities that define P(M ). Thus, P(M ) can be described by (A= , b) and (A≤ , c)
such that
                                     ∀M∈M A= 1M = b and A≤ 1M ≤ c.
While the former set cannot be more than m, the latter set can be exponential in m and we do not assume
that (A≤ , c) is given to us explicitly.
Separation Oracles. On occasion we require an access to a separation oracle for P(M ) of the following
form: Given λ ∈ Rm satisfying A= λ = b, the separation oracle either says that A≤ λ ≤ c or outputs an
inequality (a′ , c′ ) such that
                                            ha′ , λ i > c′ .
In fact, such an oracle is often termed a strong separation oracle.6
Counting Oracles. The standard counting problem associated to M is to determine |M |, i.e., the number
of vertices of P(M ). We are interested in a more general counting problem associated to M where there is
  6 In our results that depend on access to a strong separation oracle, we can relax the guarantee to that of a weak separation oracle.

We omit the details.


                                                                  9
a weight λe for each e ∈ [m] and the weight of M under this measure is e−λ (M) . A generalized exact counting
oracle for M then outputs the following two quantities:

   1. Z λ = ∑M∈M e−λ (M) and
            def


   2. for every e ∈ [m], Zeλ = ∑M∈M , M∋e e−λ (M) .
                                    def


The oracle is assumed to be efficient, as in it runs in time polynomial in m and bits needed to represent e−λe
for any e ∈ [m].7
    While efficient generalized exact counting oracles are known for some settings, for many problems of
interest the exact counting problem is #P-hard. However, often, for these #P-hard problems, efficient oracles
which can compute arbitrarily good approximations to the quantities of interest are known. Thus, we have
to relax the notion to generalized approximate counting oracles which are possibly randomized. Such an
oracle, given ε , α > 0 and weights λ ∈ Rm , returns Zeλ and Zeeλ for each e ∈ [m]. The following guarantees
hold with probability at least 1 − α ,

   1. (1 − ε )Z λ ≤ Zeλ ≤ (1 + ε )Z λ and

   2. for every e ∈ [m], (1 − ε )Zeλ ≤ Zeeλ ≤ (1 + ε )Zeλ .

The running time is polynomial in m, 1/ε , log 1/α and the number of bits needed to represent e−λe for any e ∈
[m]. For the sake of readability, we ignore the fact that approximate counting oracle may be randomized. The
statements of the theorems that use randomized approximate counting oracles can be modified appropriately
to include the dependence on α . Note that if the problem at hand is self-reducible, then having access to
an oracle that outputs an approximation to just Z λ suffices. We omit the details and the reader is referred
to a discussion on self-reducibility and counting in [32]. Finally, it can be shown that, in our setting, the
existence of a generalized (exact or approximate) counting oracle is a stronger requirement than the existence
of a separation oracle.
Interior of the Polytope. The dimension of P(M ) is m − rank(A= ); the polytope restricted to this affine
space is full dimensional. Since we work with polytopes that are not full dimensional, we extend the notion
of the interior of the polytope P(M ) and use the following definition.

Definition 2.1 For an η > 0, a point θ is said to be in the η -interior of P(M ) if
                                ′ = ′
                                 θ : A θ = b, kθ − θ ′ k ≤ η ⊆ P(M ).

We say that θ is in the interior of P(M ) if θ is in the η -interior of P(M ) for some η > 0.

We are be interested in the case where η ≥ poly(m)
                                              1
                                                   . Hence, it is natural to ask if for every P(M ), there is a
                1
point in its poly(m) -interior. The following lemma, whose proof appears in Section 7, asserts that the answer
is yes if the entries of A≤ and c are reasonable (as is the case in all our applications).
                                                             =          ≤
Lemma 2.2 Let M ⊆ {0, 1}m and P(M ) = x ∈ Rm            ≥0 : A x = b, A x ≤ c be such that all the entries in
A≤ , c ∈ poly(m) · Z and their absolute values are at most poly(m). Then there exists a θ̃ ∈ P(M ) such that θ̃
            1

             1
is in the poly(m) -interior of P(M ).

At this point, if one wishes, one can look at Section 3 for some examples of combinatorial polytopes we
consider in this paper.
   7 To deal with issues of irrationality, it suffices to obtain the first k bits of Z λ and Z λ in time polynomial in k and m.
                                                                                              e


                                                                    10
2.3 The Maximum Entropy Convex Program
In this section we present the convex program for computing max-entropy distributions. Let P(M ) be the
polytope corresponding to M . While we do not care about whether we have an oracle for M in this section,
the notion of interiority is important.
    For any point θ ∈ P(M ), by definition, it can be written as a convex combination of vertices of P(M ),
each of which is indicator vector for some M ∈ M . Each such convex combination is a probability distribu-
tion over M ∈ M . Of central interest in this paper is a way to find the convex combination that maximizes
the entropy of the underlying probability distribution. Given θ , we can express the problem of finding the
max-entropy distribution over the vertices of P(M ) as the program in Figure 1. Here 0 ln 10 is assumed to


                                                sup          ∑M∈M pM ln p1M
                                                s.t.
                                         ∀e ∈ [m] ∑M∈M , M∋e pM = θe
                                                    ∑M∈M pM = 1
                                        ∀M ∈ M                  pM ≥ 0


                                    Figure 1: Max-Entropy Program for (M , θ )

be 0. This entropy function is easily seen to be concave and, hence, maximizing it is a convex programming
problem. The following folklore lemma, whose proof appears in Appendix A.1, shows that if θ is in the
interior of P(M ), then the max-entropy distribution corresponding to it is unique and can be succinctly
                                                                                    def
represented. Recall the notation that for λ : [m] 7→ R and M ∈ M , λ (M) = hλ , 1M i = ∑e∈M λe .
Lemma 2.3 For a point θ in the interior of P(M ), there exists a unique distribution p⋆ which attains the
max-entropy while satisfying
                                            ∑ p⋆M 1M = θ .
                                                       M∈M

Moreover, there exists a λ ⋆ : [m] 7→ R such that p⋆M ∝ e−λ (M) for each M ∈ M .
                                                           ⋆



As we observe soon, while p⋆ is unique, λ ⋆ may not be. First, we record the following definitions about
such product distributions.
Definition 2.4 For any λ ∈ Rm , we define the distribution pλ on M such that
                                                      −λ (M)
                                                 def e
                                           pλM =             where Z λ =      ∑ e−λ (N) .
                                                                       def
                             ∀M ∈ M                      λ
                                                       Z                      N∈M

The marginals of such a distribution are denoted by θ λ and defined to be
                                                        Zeλ
                          θeλ =        ∑        pλM =       where Zeλ =     ∑ e−λ (M) .
                              def                                     def

                                    M∈M , M∋e           Zλ                M∈M , M∋e

The proof of this lemma relies on establishing that strong duality holds for computing the max-entropy
distribution with marginals θ for the convex program in Figure 1. The dual of this program appears in
Figure 2. Thus, if θ is in the interior of P(M ), then there is a λ ⋆ such that p⋆ = pλ and fθ (λ ⋆ ) = H(p⋆ ).
                                                                                         ⋆


    Note that λ ⋆ may not be unique and, finally, that an important property of the dual objective function is
that fθ does not change if we shift by a vector in the span of the rows of A= . This is captured in the following
lemma whose proof appears in Appendix A.2.

                                                              11
Lemma 2.5 fθ (λ ) = fθ (λ + (A=)⊤ d) for any d.

Thus, we can restrict our search for the optimal solution to the set {λ ∈ Rm : A= λ = 0}. In this set there is
a unique λ ⋆ which achieves the optimal value since the constraints (A= , b) are assumed to form a maximal
linearly independent set. We refer to this λ ⋆ as the unique solution to the dual convex program.


                                         fθ (λ ) = ∑e∈[m] θe λe + ln ∑M∈M e−λ (M)
                                               def
                                   inf
                                  s.t.
                             ∀e ∈ [m]                    λe ∈ R


                           Figure 2: Dual of the Max-Entropy Program for (M , θ )


2.4 Formal Statement of Our Results
Our first result shows that if one has access to an generalized exact counting oracle then one can indeed
compute a good approximation to the max-entropy distribution for specified marginals.

Theorem 2.6 There exists an algorithm that, given a maximal set of linearly independent equalities (A= , b)
and a generalized exact counting oracle for P(M ) ⊆ Rm , a θ in the η -interior of P(M ) and an ε > 0,
returns a λ ◦ such that
                                         fθ (λ ◦ ) ≤ fθ (λ ⋆ ) + ε ,
where λ ⋆ is the optimal solution to the dual of the max-entropy convex program for (M , θ ) from Figure 2.
Assuming that the generalized exact counting oracle is polynomial in its input parameters, the running time
of the algorithm is polynomial in m, 1/η , log 1/ε and the number of bits needed to represent θ and (A= , b).

The proof of this theorem follows from an application of the ellipsoid algorithm for minimizing the dual
                                                                                      poly(m)
convex program. At a first glance, it may seem enough to show that kλ ⋆ k ≤ 2 η since the number of
iterations of the ellipsoid algorithm depends on log kλ ⋆ k. Unfortunately, this is not enough since each call
to the oracle with input λ takes time polynomial in the number of bits needed to represent e−λe for any
e ∈ [m]. We show the following theorem which provides a polynomial bound on kλ ⋆ k.

Theorem 2.7 Let θ be in the η -interior of P(M ) ⊆ Rm . Then there exists an optimal solution λ ⋆ to the
dual of the max-entropy convex program such that kλ ⋆ k ≤ m
                                                          η.

We specifically note that the proof of this theorem needs that λ ⋆ satisfies A= λ ⋆ = 0. Combinatorially, it is an
interesting open problem to see one can get such a bound depending only on 1/η . Next we generalize Theo-
rem 2.6 to polytopes where only an approximate counting oracle exists, for example, the perfect matching
problem in bipartite graphs. While we state this theorem in the context of deterministic counting oracles, it
holds in the randomized setting as well.

Theorem 2.8 There exists an algorithm, that given a maximal set of linearly independent equalities (A= , b),
a generalized approximate counting oracle for P(M ) ⊆ Rm , a θ in η -interior of P(M ) and an ε > 0, returns
a λ ◦ such that
                                          fθ (λ ◦ ) ≤ fθ (λ ⋆ ) + ε .
Here λ ⋆ is an optimal solution to the dual of the max-entropy convex program for (M , θ ). Assuming that
the generalized approximate counting oracle is polynomial in its input parameters, the running time of the
algorithm is polynomial in m, 1/η , 1/ε and the number of bits needed to represent θ and (A= , b).

                                                       12
It can be shown that once we have a solution λ ◦ to the dual convex program such that

                                             fθ (λ ◦ ) ≤ fθ (λ ⋆ ) + ε

as in Theorems 2.6 and 2.8, one can show that the marginals obtained
                                                                  √      from the distribution corresponding
to λ ◦ is close to that of λ ⋆ (which is θ ), i.e., θ λ − θ ∞ ≤ O( ε ). See Appendix A.2, and in particular
                                                       ◦


Corollary A.5 for a proof.

Remark 2.9 We can also obtain proofs of Theorems 2.6 and 2.8 by applying the framework of projected
gradient descent. (See Section 3.2.3 in [29] for details on the gradient descent method.) For the gradient
descent method to be polynomial time, one would need an upper bound on kλ ⋆ k and k∇ f k2→2 . The first
bound is provided by Theorem 2.7 and the second bound is proved in Theorem C.1 in Appendix C. We have
chosen the ellipsoid method-based proofs of Theorems 2.6 and 2.8 since the ellipsoid method is required in
the proof of Theorem 2.11.

Our final theorem proves the reverse: If one can compute good approximations to the max-entropy convex
program for P(M ) for a given marginal vector, then one can compute good approximations to the number
of vertices in P(M ). First, we need a notion of a max-entropy oracle for M .

Definition 2.10 An approximate max-entropy oracle for M , given a θ in the η -interior of P(M ), a ζ > 0,
and an ε > 0, either
   1. asserts that infλ fθ (λ ) ≥ ζ − ε or

   2. returns a λ ∈ Rm such that fθ (λ ) ≤ ζ + ε .
The oracle is assumed to be efficient, i.e., it runs in time polynomial in m, 1/ε , 1/η and the number of bits
needed to represent ζ .

This is consistent with the algorithms given by Theorem 2.6 and 2.8.

Theorem 2.11 There exists an algorithm that, given a maximal set of linearly independent equalities (A= , b)
and a separation oracle and an approximate optimization oracle for M as above, returns a Ze such that (1 −
ε )|M | ≤ Ze ≤ (1 + ε )|M |. Assuming that the running times of the separation oracle and the approximate
max-entropy oracle are polynomial in their respective input parameters, the running time of the algorithm
is bounded by a polynomial in m, 1/ε and the number of bits needed to represent (A= , b).

Analogously, one can easily formulate and prove a randomized version of Theorem 2.11, we omit the de-
tails. As an important corollary of this theorem, if one is able to efficiently find approximate max-entropy
distributions for the perfect matching polytope for general graphs, then one can approximately count the
number of perfect matchings they contain. Both problems have long been open and this result, in particular,
relates their hardness.

Remark 2.12 One may ask if Theorem 2.11 can be strengthened to obtain generalized approximate count-
ing oracles from max-entropy oracles. The question is natural since Theorems 2.6 and 2.8 assume access
to generalized counting oracles. The answer is yes and is provided in Theorem B.2 in Appendix B. It turns
out that one needs access to a generalized max-entropy oracle, an oracle that can compute the distribution
that minimizes the KL-divergence with respect to a fixed product distribution and a given set of marginals.
These latter programs are shown, in Appendix B, to be no more general than max-entropy programs. In fact,
analogs of Theorems 2.6 and 2.8 can be proved for min-KL-divergence programs rather than max-entropy
programs, see Theorem B.5.

                                                       13
2.5 The Ellipsoid Algorithm
In this section we review the basics of the ellipsoid algorithm. The ellipsoid algorithm is used in the proofs
of our equivalence between optimization and counting: Both in the proof of Theorems 2.6 and 2.8 and in
the proof of Theorem 2.11. Consider the following optimization problem where g(·) is convex and hi (·) are
affine functions.

                                                            inf          g(λ )
                                                            s.t.
                                                  ∀ 1 ≤ i ≤ k hi (λ ) = 0
                                                                        λ ∈ Rm

We assume that g is differentiable everywhere and that its gradient, denoted by ∇g, is defined everywhere.
In our application, for a polytope P(M ) and a θ in the η -interior of P(M ), g = fθ , the objective function
in the dual program of Figure 2. The hi (·)s are the constraints A= λ = 0, where (A= , c) is the maximal set of
linearly independent equalities satisfied by the vertices of M . Thus, as noted in Lemma 2.5, we can restrict
our search for the optimal solution to the set K which is defined to be
                                                   def
                                                 K = {λ ∈ Rm : A= λ = 0}.

Note that 0 ∈ K. The ellipsoid algorithm can be used to solve such a convex program under fairly general
conditions and we first state a version of it needed in the proof of Theorem 2.6. A crucial requirement is a
strong first-order oracle for g which is a function such that given a λ , outputs g(λ ) and ∇g(λ ). Since we
are only interested in λ ∈ K, and we are given the equalities describing K explicitly, we assume that we can
project ∇g(λ ) to K. By abuse of notation, we denote the latter also by ∇g(λ ).
    The following theorem claims that if one is given access to a strong first-order oracle for g, one can use
the ellipsoid algorithm to obtain an approximately optimal solution to the convex program mentioned above.
This statement is easily derivable from [3] (Theorem 8.2.1).

Theorem 2.13 Given any β > 0 and R > 0, there is an algorithm which, given a strong first-order oracle
for g, returns a point λ ′ ∈ Rm such that
                                                                                !
                   g(λ ′ ) ≤        inf         g(λ ) + β           sup          g(λ ) −        inf         g(λ ) .
                               λ ∈K, kλ k∞ ≤R                λ ∈K, kλ k∞ ≤R                λ ∈K, kλ k∞ ≤R


The number of calls to the strong first-order oracle for g are bounded by a polynomial in m, log R and log 1/β .

While we do not explicitly describe the ellipsoid algorithm here, we need the following basic properties
about minimum volume enclosing ellipsoids which forms the basis of the ellipsoid algorithm. A set E ⊆ Rm
                                                                                                             def
is an ellipsoid if there exists a vector a ∈ Rm and a positive definite m × m-matrix A such that E = E(A, a) =
{x ∈ Rm : (x − a)⊤ A−1 (x − a) ≤ 1}. We also denote Vol(E) to be the volume enclosed by the ellipsoid E.
The following theorem follows from the Löwner-John Ellipsoid. We refer the reader to [15] for more details.

Theorem 2.14 Given an ellipsoid E(A, a) and a half-space {x : hc, xi ≤ hc, ai} passing through a there
                                                                          ′)     1
exists an ellipsoid E ′ ⊇ E(A, a) ∩ {x : hc, xi ≤ hc, ai} such that Vol(E
                                                                    Vol(E) ≤ e
                                                                              − 2m .

In our applications of this theorem, we in fact need the ellipsoid to be in an affine space of dimension
possibly lower than m. The definitions and the theorem continue to hold under such a setting.


                                                                   14
3 Examples of Combinatorial Polytopes
If one wishes, one can keep the following combinatorial polytopes in mind while trying to understand and
interpret the results of this paper.
The Spanning Tree Polytope. Given a graph G = (V, E), let
                                n                                    o
                            def
                        M = 1T ∈ R|E| : T ⊆ E is a spanning tree of G .

It follows from a result of Edmonds [9] that
                              n                                                     o
                                    |E|
                    P(M ) = x ∈ R≥0 : x(E(V )) = |V | − 1, x(E(S)) ≤ |S| − 1 ∀S ⊆ V
                        def                                                                                def
where, for S ⊆ V, E(S) = {e = {u, v} ∈ E : {u, v} ∩ S = {u, v}} and, for a subset of edges H ⊆ E, x(H) =
∑e∈H xe . Edmond [8] also shows the existence of a separation oracle for this polytope. A generalized exact
counting oracle is known for this spanning tree polytope via Kirchoff’s matrix-tree theorem, see [14].
The Perfect Matching Polytope for Bipartite Graphs. Given a bipartite graph G = (V, E), let
                                n                                       o
                            def
                         M = 1M ∈ R|E| : M is a perfect matching in G .

It follows from a theorem of Birkhoff [13] that, when G is bipartite,
                                         n                            o
                                                  |E|
                                P(M ) = x ∈ R≥0 : x(δ (v)) = 1 ∀v ∈ V
                        def
where, for v ∈ V, δ (v) = {e = {u, v} ∈ E}. Here, it can be shown that all the facets, i.e., the defining
inequalities, are one of the set of 2m inequalities 0 ≤ xe ≤ 1 for all e ∈ [m]. The exact counting problem is
#P-hard and while a (randomized) generalized approximate counting oracle follows from a result of Jerrum,
Sinclair and Vigoda [21] for computing permanents.
The Cycle Cover Polytope for Directed Graphs. Given a directed graph G = (V, A), let
                                   n                                o
                               def
                           M = 1M ∈ R|A| : M is a cycle cover in G .

A cycle cover in G is a collection of vertex disjoint directed cycles that cover all the vertices of G. The
corresponding cycle cover polytope is denoted by P(M ). This polytope is easily seen to be a special case of
the perfect matching polytope for bipartite graphs as follows. For G = (V, A), construct a bipartite graph H =
(VL ,VR , E) where VL = VR = V. For each vertex v ∈ V we have vL ∈ VL and vR ∈ VR . There is an edge between
uL ∈ VL and vR ∈ VR in H if and only if (u, v) ∈ A. Thus, there is a one-to-one correspondence between cycle
covers in G and perfect matchings in H. Hence, the [21] algorithm gives a generalized approximate counting
oracle in this case as well.
The Perfect Matching Polytope for General Graphs. Given a graph G = (V, E), let
                                n                                    o
                            def
                         M = 1M ∈ R|E| : M is a perfect matching in G .

A celebrated result of Edmonds [7] states that
                                                                                          
                                |E|                                 |S| − 1
           P(M ) =         x ∈ R≥0 : x(δ (v)) = 1 ∀v ∈ V, x(E(S)) ≤         ∀S ⊆ V, |S| odd .
                                                                       2
The separation oracle for this polytope is non-trivial and follows from the characterization result of Ed-
monds. A direct separation oracle was also given by Padberg and Rao [31]. Coming up with a counting
oracle for this polytope, even with uniform weights which counts the number of perfect matchings in a
general graph, is a long-standing open problem.

                                                     15
4 New Algorithmic Approaches for the Traveling Salesman Problem
Max-entropy distributions over spanning trees have been successfully applied to obtain improved algorithms
for the symmetric [30] as well as the asymmetric traveling salesman problem [1]. We outline here a different
algorithmic approach, using max-entropy distributions over cycle covers, which becomes computationally
feasible as a consequence of our results. Let us consider the asymmetric traveling salesman problem (ATSP).
We are given a complete directed graph G = (V, E) and cost function c : E → R≥0 which satisfies the directed
triangle inequality. The goal is find a Hamiltonian cycle of smallest cost. First, we formulate the following
subtour elimination linear program in Figure 3.


                                         min            ∑e∈E ce xe
                                         s.t.
                                      ∀v ∈ V    x(δ + (v)) = x(δ − (v)) = 1
                                     ∀S ⊆ V           x(δ + (S)) ≥ 1
                                      ∀e ∈ E            0 ≤ xe ≤ 1


                            Figure 3: Subtour Elimination LP for G = (V, E) and c

Here, for a vertex v, δ + (v) is the set of directed edges going out of it and δ − (v) is the set of directed
edges coming in to v. Let x⋆ denote the optimal solution to this linear program. The authors of [1] make the
                      def
observation that θuv = n−1     ⋆     ⋆
                           n (xuv +xvu ) defined on the undirected edges is a point in the interior of the spanning
tree polytope on G. The algorithm then samples a spanning tree T from the max-entropy            distribution with
marginals as given by θ and crucially relies on properties of such a T to obtain an O log log n -approximation
                                                                                            log n

algorithm for the ATSP problem.
     Interestingly, there is another integral polytope in which x⋆ is contained. Consider the convex hull P of
all cycle covers of G, see Section 3. Then,
                                       n                                       o
                                               |E|
                                  P = x ∈ R≥0 : x(δ + (v)) = x(δ − (v)) = 1 .

It is easy to see that x⋆ ∈ P. Similar to the cycle cover algorithm of Frieze et al [12], the following is a
natural algorithm for the ATSP problem.
Randomized Cycle Cover Algorithm

   1. Initialize H ← /0.

   2. While G is not a single vertex

         • Solve the subtour elimination LP for G to obtain the solution x⋆ .
         • Sample a cycle cover C from the max-entropy distribution with marginals x⋆ .
         • Include in H all edges in C , i.e., H ← H ∪ (∪C∈C C) .
         • Select one representative vertex vC in each cycle C ∈ C and delete all the other vertices.

   3. Return H.

Before analyzing the performance of this algorithm, a basic question is whether this algorithm can be im-
plemented in polynomial time. As an application of Theorem 2.8 to the cycle cover polytope for directed

                                                        16
graphs, it follows that one can sample a cycle cover from the max-entropy distribution in polynomial time
and, thus, the question is answered affirmatively. The generalized (randomized) approximate counting or-
acle for cycle covers in a graph follows from the work of [21]. The technical condition of interiority of x⋆
can be satisfied with a slight loss in optimality of the objective function. The analysis of worst case perfor-
mance of this algorithm is left open, but to the best of our knowledge, there is no example ruling out that the
Randomized Cycle Cover Algorithm is an O(1)-approximation. Similarly, the application of Theorem 2.8
to the perfect matching polytope in bipartite graphs makes the permanent-based approach suggested in [36]
for the (symmetric) TSP computationally feasible.


5 Bounding Box
In this section, we prove Theorem 2.7 and show that there is a bounding box of small radius containing the
optimal solution λ ⋆ . We begin with the following lemma.

Lemma 5.1 Let θ be a point in the η -interior of P(M ) ⊆ Rm and let λ ⋆ be the optimal solution to the dual
convex program. Then for any x ∈ P(M )

                                                 hλ ⋆ , θ − xi ≤ m.

Proof: First, note that the supremum of the primal convex program over all θ is ln |M | ≤ m. Hence, from
strong duality it follows that f (λ ⋆ ) ≤ m. This implies that

                       f (λ ⋆ ) = hλ ⋆ , θ i + ln ∑ e−λ (M) = ln ∑ ehλ ,θ i−λ (M) ≤ m.
                                                         ⋆                  ⋆   ⋆


                                               M∈M                 M∈M

Hence, for every M ∈ M ,
                                              hλ ⋆ , θ i − λ ⋆ (M) ≤ m.                                      (3)
Since x ∈ P(M ), we have x = ∑M∈M rM 1M where ∑M∈M rM = 1 and rM ≥ 0 for each M ∈ M . Multiplying
(3) by rM and summing over M we get

                                    ∑ rM (hλ ⋆ , θ i − λ ⋆(M)) ≤ ∑ rM m.
                                   M∈M                                M∈M

This implies that
                                           hλ ⋆ , θ i − ∑ rM λ ⋆ (M) ≤ m.
                                                 M∈M
As a consequence, we obtain that hλ , θ i − hλ , xi ≤ m, completing the proof of the lemma.
                                   ⋆          ⋆



Proof of Theorem 2.7. Recall that A= x = c denotes the maximal set of independent equalities satisfied by
P(M ). We now define the following objects. Let
                                      def
                                    B = {x ∈ Rm : A= x = c, kx − θ k ≤ η }

be the ball centered around θ restricted to the affine space A= x = c of radius η . Since θ is in the η -interior
of P(M ), we have that B ⊆ P(M ). Let
                                     def
                                  Q = {y ∈ Rm : A= y = c, ky − θ k ≤ 1/η }

be the ball centered around θ of radius η1 in the same affine space and let

                            e def
                            Q = {z ∈ Rm : A= z = c, hz − θ , x − θ i ≤ 1 ∀x ∈ B}.

                                                         17
Lemma 5.2 Q = e
              Q.

                               e Let y ∈ Q. The constraints A= y = c are clearly satisfied since y ∈ Q. For
Proof: We first prove that Q ⊆ Q.
any x ∈ B,
                                                                  1
                             hy − θ , x − θ i ≤ ky − θ kkx − θ k ≤ · η = 1.
                                                                  η
Thus, y ∈ e
          Q. Now we show that Q ⊆ e
                                  Q. Let z ∈ eQ. The constraints A= z = c are clearly satisfied since z ∈ e
                                                                                                          Q.
Now consider
                                          def      z−θ
                                       z′ = θ +            · η.
                                                  kz − θ k
We have that
                                                      A= z − A= θ
                                     A= z′ = A= θ +               · η = c.
                                                       kz − θ k
Moreover,
                                                z−θ             kz − θ k
                             kz′ − θ k = θ +            ·η −θ =          · η = η.
                                               kz − θ k         kz − θ k
Thus, z′ ∈ B. Hence, we must have hz − θ , z′ − θ i ≤ 1. This implies that
                                                             
                                                    z−θ
                                           z − θ,           ·η ≤ 1
                                                   kz − θ k

and, therefore,
                                                 kz − θ k ≤ 1/η .
Thus, z ∈ Q completing the proof.

We now show that
                                               e
                                               λ = −λ ⋆/m + θ ∈ Q.
                                                                e

To see this, first observe that
                                      A= e
                                         λ = −A= λ ⋆/m + A= θ = 0 + c.
Here we have used the fact that A= λ ⋆ = 0, see Lemma 2.5. We now verify the second condition. Let x ∈ B.
Then
                                                  −hλ ⋆ , x − θ i  1
                                he
                                 λ − θ,x − θi =                   ≤ ·m = 1
                                                        m          m
where the last inequality follows from that fact that x ∈ B ⊆ P(M ) and Lemma 5.1. Thus, e    λ ∈ Q and
                         e
therefore, we must have kλ − θ k ≤ 1/η . Therefore, kλ /mk ≤ 1/η proving Theorem 2.7.
                                                      ⋆




6 Optimization via Counting
In this section, we prove Theorems 2.6 and 2.8. The proof of both the theorems rely on the bounding box
result of Theorem 2.7 and employs the framework of the ellipsoid algorithm from Section 2.5.




                                                       18
6.1 Proof of Theorem 2.6
We first use Theorem 2.13 to give a proof of Theorem 2.6. The algorithm assumes access to a strong first-
order oracle for P(M ). We then present details of how to implement a strong first-order oracle using an
generalized exact counting oracle. Suppose λ ⋆ is the optimum of our convex program. Theorem 2.7 implies
                                                                    def
that for kλ ⋆ k∞ ≤ m/η . Thus, we may pick the bounding radius to R = m/η and it does not cut the optimal λ ⋆
we are looking for. The only thing left to choose is a β such that
                                                                      ε
                                 β≤                                                           .
                                          supλ ∈K, kλ k∞ ≤R fθ (λ ) − infλ ∈K, kλ k∞ ≤R fθ (λ )

This would imply that the solution λ ◦ output by employing the ellipsoid method from Theorem 2.13 is such
that
                                           fθ (λ ◦ ) ≤ fθ (λ ⋆ ) + ε .
To establish a bound on β , start by noticing that infλ fθ (λ ) ≥ 0. This follows from weak-duality and the fact
that entropy is always non-negative. On the other hand we have the following simple lemma.

Lemma 6.1 supkλ k∞ ≤R fθ (λ ) ≤ (2m + 1)R.

Proof:
                        fθ (λ ) ≤ |hλ , θ i| + ln ∑ e−λ (M) ≤ mR + ln(2m emR ) ≤ (2m + 1)R.
                                                    M∈M

Here we have used the fact that |M | ≤ 2m and that θe ∈ [0, 1] for each e ∈ [m].
                                 ε
Thus, β can be chosen to be (2m+1)R  . Hence, the running time of the ellipsoid method depends polynomially
on the the time it takes to implement the strong first-order oracle for fθ and log mR  ε .
Since fθ (λ ) = hλ , θ i + ln ∑M∈M e− λ (M)                  λ
                                            = hλ , θ i + ln Z , it is easily seen that

                                                   ∑M∈M , M∋e e−λ (M)        Zeλ
                              ∇ fθ (λ )e = θe −                       = θe −     = θe − θeλ .
                                                    ∑N∈M e−λ (N)             Zλ

Hence, ∇ fθ (λ ) = θ − θ λ . Recall that the strong first-order oracle for fθ requires, for a given λ , fθ (λ )
and ∇ fθ (λ ). The generalized exact counting oracle for P(M ) immediately does it as it gives us Zeλ for all
e ∈ [m] and Z λ . This allows us to compute fθ (λ ) and ∇ fθ (λ ) in one call to such an oracle. In addition we
also need time proportional to the number of bits needed to represent θ .
    Thus, the number of calls to the counting oracle by the ellipsoid algorithm of Theorem 2.13 is bounded
by a polynomial in m, log R and log 1/ε . Since each oracle call can be implemented in time polynomial in m
and R,8 this gives the required running time and concludes the proof of Theorem 2.6.

6.2 Proof of Theorem 2.8
Now we give the ellipsoid algorithm that works with a generalized approximate counting oracle and prove
Theorem 2.8. Here, the fact that the counting oracle is approximate means that the gradient computed as
in the previous section is approximate. Thus, this raises the possibility of cutting off the optimal λ ⋆ during
the run of the ellipsoid algorithm. We present the ellipsoid algorithm to check, given a θ and a ζ , whether
| fθ (λ ⋆ ) − ζ | ≤ ε . The technical heart of the matter is to show that when | fθ (λ ⋆ ) − ζ | ≤ ε , λ ⋆ is never cut
   8 Here we ignore the fact that e−λe can be irrational. This issue can be dealt in a standard manner as is done in the implementation

details of all ellipsoid algorithms. See [15] for details.


                                                                 19
off of the successive ellipsoids obtained by adding the approximate gradient constraints. Moreover, in this
case, once the radius of the ellipsoid becomes small enough, we can output its center as a guess for λ ⋆ . Since
the radius of the final ellipsoid is small and contains λ ⋆ , the following lemma, which bounds the Lipschitz
constant of fθ , implies that the value of fθ at the center of the ellipsoid is close enough to fθ (λ ⋆ ).

Lemma 6.2 For any λ , λ ′                                               √
                                                 fθ (λ ) − fθ (λ ′ ) ≤ 2 mkλ − λ ′ k.

Proof: We have

                                                                     ∑M∈M e−λ (M)
                             fθ (λ ) − fθ (λ ′ ) = hθ , λ − λ ′ i + ln
                                                                     ∑M∈M e−λ (M)
                                                                              ′


                                                                           e−λ (M)
                                                 ≤ kθ kkλ − λ ′ k + ln max −λ ′ (M)
                                                                      M∈M e
                                                   √
                                                 ≤ mkλ − λ ′ k + max (λ ′ (M) − λ (M))
                                                                   M∈M
                                                   √               √                √
                                                 ≤ mkλ − λ k + mkλ − λ ′ k ≤ 2 mkλ − λ ′ k
                                                             ′


which completes the proof. Here we have used the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality in the first and third inequal-
ities and in the second inequality we have used the fact that θ ∈ [0, 1]m .

Proceeding to the ellipsoid algorithm underlying the proof of Theorem 2.8, we do a binary search on the
optimal value fθ (λ ⋆ ) up to an accuracy of ε/8. For a guess ζ ∈ (0, m], we check whether the guess is correct
with the following ellipsoid algorithm.9

   1. Input

         (a) An error parameter ε > 0.
         (b) An interiority parameter η > 0.
         (c) A θ which is guaranteed to be in the η -interior of P(M ).
         (d) A maximally linearly independent set of equalities (A= , b) for P(M ).
         (e) A generalized approximate counting oracle for M .
         (f) A guess ζ ∈ (0, m] (for fθ (λ ⋆ )).

   2. Initialization
                       def
         (a) Let E0 = E(B0 , c0 ) be a sphere with radius R = m/η centered around the origin (thus, containing
             λ ⋆ by Theorem 2.7) and restricted to the affine space A= x = 0.
         (b) Set t = 0
                                                                               ε
   3. Repeat until the ellipsoid Et is contained in a ball of radius at most 16√ m
                                                                                   .

                                           def                    def
         (a) Given the ellipsoid Et = E(Bt , ct ), set λt = ct .
         (b) Compute ζt using the counting oracle such that fθ (λt ) − ε/8 ≤ ζt ≤ fθ (λt ) + ε/8.
         (c) If ζt ≤ ζ
                 i. then return λt and stop.
   9 For ease of analysis, we assume that all oracle calls are answered correctly with probability 1. The failure probability can be

adjusted to arbitrary precision with a slight degradation in the running time.


                                                                  20
              ii. else
                   A. Compute θt such that kθt − θ λt k1 ≤ ε/16R using the counting oracle.
                   B. Compute the ellipsoid Et+1 to be the smallest ellipsoid containing the half-ellipsoid
                       {λ ∈ Et : hλ − λt , θ − θt i ≤ 0} restricted to the affine space A= x = 0.
             iii. t = t + 1.

   4. Let T = t and compute ζT using the counting oracle such that fθ (λT ) − ε/8 ≤ ζT ≤ fθ (λT ) + ε/8.

   5. If ζT ≤ ζ

        (a) then return λT and stop.
        (b) else return fθ (λ ⋆ ) > ζ and stop (ζ is not a good guess for fθ (λ ⋆ )).

We first show that the algorithm can be implemented using a polynomial number of queries to the approxi-
mate oracle. Steps (3b), (3(c)iiA) and (4) can be computed using oracle calls to the generalized approximate
counting oracle for M to obtain Zeλt such that (1− ε/16)Z λt ≤ Zeλt ≤ (1+ ε/16)Z λt . We set ζt = hλt , θ i+ ln Zeλt .
A simple calculation then shows that
                                                        ε                   ε
                                          fθ (λt ) −      ≤ ζt ≤ fθ (λt ) +
                                                        8                   8

since fθ (λt ) = hλt , θ i + ln Z λt . Similarly using one oracle call to the counting oracle with error parameter
 ε
16R , we can compute
                                                                     ε
                                                    kθt − θ λt k1 ≤
                                                                    8R
as needed in Step (3(c)iiA) of the algorithm. Using Theorem 2.14, the number of iterations can be bounded
by a polynomial in m, log R/ε . The analysis is quite standard and omitted. Each of the oracle call can be
implemented in time polynomial in m, R and 1/ε . We now show the following lemma which completes the
proof of Theorem 2.8.

Lemma 6.3 Let ζ ◦ be the smallest guess for which the ellipsoid algorithm succeeds in finding a solution
and let λ ◦ denote the corresponding solution returned. Then, fθ (λ ◦ ) ≤ fθ (λ ⋆ ) + ε .

Proof: Observe that we have
                                                     ε                     ε
                                         fθ (λ ◦ ) −   ≤ ζ ◦ ≤ fθ (λ ◦ ) + .
                                                     8                     8
Since ζ is the smallest guess for which the algorithm succeeds in returning an answer, it fails for some
         ◦

ζ ∈ [ζ ◦ − ε/8, ζ ◦ ]. We show that fθ (λ ⋆ ) ≥ ζ − ε/4. This suffices to prove the theorem since
                                                        ε      ε             ε
                                    fθ (λ ◦ ) ≤ ζ ◦ +     ≤ ζ + ≤ fθ (λ ⋆ ) + .
                                                        8      4             2
Suppose for the sake of contradiction that
                                                                 ε
                                                  fθ (λ ⋆ ) < ζ − .                                               (4)
                                                                 4
We then show that λ ⋆ must be in the final ellipsoid ET when the ellipsoid algorithm is run with guess ζ . Let
λt be center of the ellipsoid Et in any iteration with guess ζ . Let ζt be computed in Step (3b) such that
                                                       ε                  ε
                                          fθ (λt ) −     ≤ ζt ≤ fθ (λt ) + .
                                                       8                  8


                                                            21
Since the algorithm does not return any answer with guess ζ , we must have ζt > ζ . Thus,
                                                      ε      ε              ε
                                    fθ (λt ) ≥ ζt −     ≥ ζ − ≥ fθ (λ ⋆ ) +
                                                      8      8              8
where the last inequality follows from inequality (4). Let θt be computed in Step (3(c)iiA) of the algorithm
                           ε
such that kθt − θ λt k1 ≤ 32R . But then

                       hλ ⋆ − λt , θ − θt i = hλ ⋆ − λt , θ − θ λt i + hλ ⋆ − λt , θ λt − θt i
                                            ≤ fθ (λ ⋆ ) − fθ (λt ) + hλ ⋆ − λt , θ λt − θt i
                                                ε
                                            ≤ − + kλ ⋆ − λt kkθ λt − θt k
                                                 8
                                                ε            ε
                                            ≤ − + 2R ·            ≤0
                                                 8         32R
where the first inequality follows from convexity of f . Thus, λ ⋆ satisfies the separating constraint put in
Step (3(c)iiB) of the algorithm. Therefore, it must be contained in the final ellipsoid ET . Let λT be the center
of the ellipsoid ET . Let ζT be computed such that |ζT − fθ (λT )| ≤ ε/8. Then
                                                ε               √              ε
                            ζT    ≤    fθ (λT ) + ≤ fθ (λ ⋆ ) + mkλ ⋆ − λT k +
                                                8                              8
                                                √     ε        ε      ε ε
                                  ≤    fθ (λ ) + m √ + ≤ ζ − + ≤ ζ
                                            ⋆
                                                   16 m 8             4 4
where we use Lemma 6.2. Therefore, the algorithm must have returned λ ◦ = λT as the feasible solution for
guess ζ a contradiction. This completes the proof of Lemma 6.3.


7     Counting via Optimization
In this section we present the proof of Theorem 2.11. We start by phrasing the problem of estimating |M |
as a convex optimization problem.

7.1 A Convex Program for Counting
Let g(θ ) denote the optimum of the max-entropy program of Figure 4 for M and a point θ in P(M ). If θ
is in the interior of P(M ), then strong duality holds for this convex program and

                                                g(θ ) = inf fθ (λ ),
                                                             λ

see Lemma 2.3. By the concavity of the Shannon entropy, g(·) can be easily seen to be a concave function
of θ . Recall that in the setting of Theorem 2.11, we have an access to an approximate max-entropy oracle
which, given a θ in the η -interior of P(M ), a ζ > 0 as a guess for g(θ ), and an ε > 0, either asserts that
g(θ ) ≥ ζ − ε or returns a λ such that fθ (λ ) ≤ ζ + ε . The running time of this oracle is polynomial in m, 1/ε
and in the number of bits needed to represent ζ . Using this oracle, we hope to get an estimate on |M |. The
starting point of the proof is the observation that the point that maximizes g(θ ) when θ is in P(M ) is
                                                           1
                                                                ∑ 1M ,
                                                    def
                                              θ⋆ =
                                                          |M | M∈M

the vertex centroid of P(M ).
Lemma 7.1 supθ ∈P(M ) g(θ ) ≤ ln |M | and g(θ ⋆ ) = ln |M |.

                                                            22
Proof: For any θ in the interior of P(M ), g(θ ) is the entropy of some probability distribution over the
elements in |M |. A standard fact in information theory implies that the maximum entropy of any distribution
over a finite set is obtained by the uniform distribution. The entropy of the uniform distribution on M is
ln |M |, hence, g(θ ) can be upper bounded by ln |M |. On the other hand, the uniform distribution over M
has marginals equal to θ ⋆ and, thus, g(θ ⋆ ) = ln |M |.

Thus, if we could find g(θ ⋆ ), then we can estimate |M |. Finding g(θ ⋆ ) is the same as solving the convex
program
                                                 sup g(θ ).
                                                   θ ∈P(M )

We use the framework of the ellipsoid method to approximately solve this convex program and find a point
which gives us a good enough estimate to g(θ ⋆ ). Note that, unlike the results in the previous section, the
bounding box here is easily obtained since θ ∈ P(M ) ⊆ [0, 1]m .

7.2 The Interior of P(M )
To check how close a candidate point θ is to θ ⋆ , we use the max-entropy separation oracle provided to
us. The main difficulty we encounter is that the running time of the max-entropy oracle with marginals
θ is inverse-polynomially dependent on the interiority of the point θ . Note that interiority of θ is a pre-
requisite for strong duality to hold and for a succinct representation of the entropy-maximizing probability
distribution to exist as in Lemma 2.3. The reason we assume a max-entropy oracle that works only if θ is in
the inverse-polynomial interior of P(M ) is that such an oracle is the best we can hope for algorithmically
and, indeed, Theorems 2.6 and 2.8 provide such an oracle. Without this restriction the proof of Theorem
2.11 is simpler, but the theorem itself is less useful as there may not exist a max-entropy oracle whose
running time does not depend on the interiority of θ .
    The first issue raised by interiority is whether the point we are looking for, θ ⋆ may not be in the inverse-
polynomial interior of P(M ). To tackle this, we show that there is a point θ • in the η -interior of P(M ) for
η = poly(ε , 1/m) such that g(θ • ) ∼ g(θ ⋆ ) = ln |M |. Thus, instead of aiming for θ ⋆ , the ellipsoid algorithm
aims for θ • .

Lemma 7.2 Given
             ε
                an ε > 0, there exists
                                    ε
                                          an η > 0 and θ • such that θ • is in η -interior of P(M ) and
g(θ ) ≥ 1 − 16m ln |M | ≥ ln |M | − 16 . Moreover, η is at least a polynomial in 1/m and ε .
   •


Before we prove this lemma, we show that there exists some point θ̃ in the poly(1/m) interior of P(M ). Such
a point is then used to show the existence of θ • . Note that we do not need to bound g(θ̃ ) and only use the
fact that it is non-negative.
                                                                                        =         ≤
Lemma 7.3 (Same as Lemma 2.2) Let M ⊆ {0, 1}m and P(M ) = x ∈ Rm                  ≥0 : A x = b, A x ≤ c be such
that all the entries in A≤ , c ∈ k1l · Z and their absolute values are at most ku . Then there exists a θ̃ ∈ P(M )
such that θ̃ is in the k k 1m1.5 -interior of P(M ). Thus, if ku , kl = poly(m), then θ̃ is in poly(1/m)-interior of
                        l u
P(M ).

Proof: Let r be the dimension of P(M ). Then, there exist r + 1 affinely independent vertices z0 , . . . , zr ∈
                           def 1
{0, 1}m . We claim that θ̃ = r+1 ∑ri=0 zi satisfies the conclusion of the lemma. Let

                                            def
                                          Fi = {x ∈ P(M ) : A≤
                                                             i x = ci }




                                                        23
be a facet of P(M ) where the inequality constraint is one of (A≤ , c). Since the dimension of a facet is one
less than that of a polytope, at least one of z0 , z1 , . . . , zr , say z0 , does not lie in F and, hence, A≤
                                                                                                             i z0 < ci .
Therefore,
                                                                      1
                                                   A≤i z0 ≤ ci −
                                                                      kl
since all coefficients are 1/kl -integral. Thus, the distance of z0 from F is at least
                                                      1         1
                                                        ≤ ≥ k k
                                                                 √ .
                                                  kl kAi k   l u m

Hence, the distance of θ̃ from F is at least m1 · ku k1√m . Since this argument works for any facet F, the distance
                                                      l
of θ̃ from every facet of P(M ) is at least m1 · ku k1√m .
                                                      l


Henceforth, we assume that kl , ku = poly(m).

Proof: [Proof of Lemma 7.2.] Let θ̃ be the point in the interior of P(M ) as guaranteed by Lemma 7.3.
Consider the point                              
                                            def        ε  ⋆         ε
                                         θ• = 1 −           θ +          θ̃ .
                                                     16m3          16m3
Since θ̃ is in the poly(1/m, ε )-interior of P(M ), θ • must also be in the poly(1/m, ε )-interior of P(M ). On
the other hand, since g(·) is a concave and non-negative function of θ , we have that
                                                   ε                        ε
                                  g(θ • ) ≥ 1 −       3
                                                        · g(θ ⋆ ) ≥ g (θ ⋆ ) − ,
                                                  16m                         16
where we used the fact that ln |M | ≤ m.


7.3 A Separation Oracle for Interiority
Our final ingredient is a test for checking whether a point θ is in the inverse-polynomial interior of P(M ).
We show that the separation oracle for P(M ) can be used to give such a test. We state the result in generality
for any polyhedron P. For any η > 0, let
                                       def
                                    Pη = {x : y ∈ P ∀y such that kx − yk ≤ η }

denote the set of η -interior points in P.

Lemma 7.4 There exists an algorithm that given a separation oracle for a polyhedron P, a set of maximal
linearly independent equalities (A= , b) satisfied by P, an η > 0, and θ ∈ Rm , either
   1. asserts that θ ∈ Pη/2m , i.e., θ is in the η/2m-interior of P, or,
   2. returns a such that ha, yi < ha, θ i for each y ∈ Pη , or equivalently, a separating hyperplane which
      separates the η -interior of P from θ .

Proof: We use the the separation oracle for P on a collection of a small number of points close to θ to
deduce if θ is in the interior of P. Even if one of these points is not in P, we use a separating hyperplane for
such a point to separate θ from the interior of P. First, we describe the procedure when P is full dimensional.
Let x0 , . . . xm form an η -regular simplex with center θ , i.e.,
                                             1 m
                                               ∑ xi = θ and kxi − x j k = η
                                             m i=0

                                                             24
for each i 6= j. Such x0 , . . . , xm can be found by starting with a regular simplex and then translating and
scaling it. Now, the algorithm applies the separation oracle for each of xi . Suppose the separation oracle
asserts that xi ∈ P for each 0 ≤ i ≤ m. In this case, we assert that θ ∈ Pη/2m . Observe that since each vertex
of the simplex is in P, we must have that the whole simplex is in P. Since the simplex is regular where each
                                                                      η
edge is length η and the center is θ , there exists a ball of radius 2m centered at θ which is contained in the
                                             η
simplex and, hence, in P. Thus, θ is in 2m -interior of P as asserted.
    Now, suppose that xi ∈ / P for some i and let a be the separating hyperplane, i.e., ha, yi < ha, xi i for each
y ∈ P. Then consider the constraint ha, yi < ha, θ i. We claim that it is satisfied by each y ∈ Pη . Let y ∈ Pη
and consider
                                                     def
                                                  y′ = y − θ + xi .
Since kθ − xi k ≤ η and y ∈ Pη , we have that y′ ∈ P which implies that ha, y′ i < ha, xi i. But this implies that

                           ha, yi = ha, y′ − xi + θ i = ha, y′ i − ha, xi i + ha, θ i < ha, θ i

which gives us the required separating hyperplane.
    Now consider the case where P is not full dimensional and let r be the dimension of P. Recall that in
this case we define interior of P by restricting our attention to points in the affine space {x : A= x = c}. We
modify the algorithm to chose a r-dimensional simplex in this affine space and check whether each of the
vertices of the simplex is in P. The analysis is identical in this case.

7.4 The Ellipsoid Algorithm for Theorem 2.11
Now we present the ellipsoid algorithm to approximately solve the convex program minθ ∈P(M ) g(θ ) and
                                                                      √
prove Theorem 2.11. The starting ellipsoid is a ball of radius m that contains [0, 1]m which contains
P(M ). Let us fix an ε > 0 and apply Lemma 7.2 to obtain η which is a polynomial in 1/m and ε and
                                                                                 ε
guarantees the existence of θ • in the η -interior such that g(θ • ) ≥ ln |M | − 16 . In the range (0, ln |M |] we
perform a binary search for the highest ζ such that the set
                                                def
                                       S(ζ , η ) = {θ ∈ Pη (M ) : g(θ ) ≥ ζ }

is non-empty when we search ζ within an accuracy ε/16.
     Given a guess ζ for g(θ • ), at an iteration t of the ellipsoid algorithm, we use the center θt of the
ellipsoid as a guess for θ • . Ideally, we would pass θt to the max-entropy oracle which would either assert
that g(θt ) ≥ ζ − ε/16 or returns a λt such that fθt (λt ) ≤ ζ + ε/16. In the first case we stop and return θt . In the
latter case, we continue the search and use this λt returned by the max-entropy oracle to update the ellipsoid
into one with a smaller volume. However, to get the guarantee on the running time, we need to first check
that the candidate point θt is in the η -interior of P(M ). Here, we use the separation oracle from Lemma
7.4. We proceed to the max-entropy oracle only if this separation oracle asserts that the point θt is in the
η/2m-interior of P(M ). In case this separation oracle outputs a hyperplane separating θt from Pη (M ), we
use this hyperplane to update the ellipsoid. The key technical fact we show is that when |ζ − g(θ • )| ≤ ε/16,
θ • is always contained in every ellipsoid. Thus, once the radius of the ellipsoid becomes small enough, we
can output its center as a guess for θ • . Since the radius of the final ellipsoid is small and contains θ • , the
following lemma implies that the value of g(·) at the center of the ellipsoid is close enough to g(θ • ) and,
hence, by Lemma 7.2, to g(θ ⋆ ).

Lemma 7.5 Let θ , θ ′ ∈ P(M ) such that kθ − θ ′ k ≤ ε and θ is in η -interior of P(M ). Then

                                               g(θ ′ ) ≥ (1 − ε/η )g(θ ).


                                                           25
Proof: Let λ ⋆ be an optimal solution to infλ fθ (λ ). Thus, pλ is the optimal solution to primal convex
                                                                               ⋆


program and H(pλ ) = infλ fθ (λ ). We construct a probability distribution q which is feasible for the primal
                ⋆


convex program with parameter θ ′ and H(q) ≥ (1 − ε/η )H(pλ ), thus, proving the lemma. We begin with a
                                                              ⋆


claim.

Claim 7.6 Let θ ′′ = θ −(1−  /η )θ
                   def     ′       ε
                         ε/η       . Then θ ′′ ∈ P(M ).

                                                                           i , xi = bi is satisfied by both θ
Proof: First, observe that any equality constraint for P(M ) of the form hA=
and θ ′ . Therefore,

                                           i , θ i − (1 − /η )hAi , θ i
                                         hA=    ′         ε     =         bi − (1 − ε/η )bi
                            i ,θ i =
                          hA=   ′′
                                                                        =                   = bi .
                                                      ε/η                        ε/η


Thus, it is enough to show that kθ ′′ − θ k ≤ η . To see this note that

                                               θ ′ − (1 − ε/η )θ      θ′ − θ    ε
                               kθ ′′ − θ k =                     −θ =        ≤     =η
                                                      ε/η              ε/η     ε/η


where the last inequality follows from the fact that kθ − θ ′ k ≤ ε .

Let q′′ be an arbitrary probability measure over M such that the marginals of q′′ equal θ ′′ , i.e., θe′′ =
∑M∈M :e∈M q′′ M . Let q be the probability measure defined to be

                                                   q = (1 − ε/η )pλ + ε/η q′′ .
                                                    def              ⋆




Then
                                               ∑     qM = (1 − ε/η )θe + ε/η θe′′ = θe′ .
                                         M∈M :e∈M

By concavity and non-negativity of the entropy function, we have

                                H(q) ≥ (1 − ε/η )H(pλ ) + ε/η H(q′′ ) ≥ (1 − ε/η )H(pλ )
                                                           ⋆                                  ⋆




as required.

We now move on to the description of the ellipsoid algorithm and subsequently complete the proof of
Theorem 2.11.

   1. Input

        (a) An error parameter ε > 0.
        (b) A maximally linearly independent set of equalities (A= , b) for P(M ).
        (c) A separation oracle for the facets (A≤ , c) of P(M ).
        (d) A max-entropy oracle for M .
        (e) A guess ζ ∈ (0, m] (for g(θ • )).

   2. Initialization

        (a) Let η be as in Lemma 7.2.
                    def                                                   √
        (b) Let E0 = E(B0 , c0 ) be a sphere with radius R =                  m containing [0, 1]m restricted to the affine
            space A= x = b.

                                                                26
         (c) Set t = 0
                                                                              εη
   3. Repeat until the ellipsoid Et is contained in a ball of radius at most 16m .
                                      def                   def
         (a) Given the ellipsoid Et = E(Bt , ct ), set θt = ct .
         (b) Check using the separation oracle for P(M ) as in Lemma 7.4 if θt ∈ P η (M )
                                                                                               2m
               i. then goto Step (3c)
              ii. else let et be the separating hyperplane returned as in Lemma 7.4, i.e., het , θ − θt i ≥ 0 for
                  all θ ∈ Pη (M ) and goto Step (3e).
         (c) Call the max-entropy oracle with input θt , ζ and ε/16.
         (d) If g(θt ) ≥ ζ − ε/16
               i. then return θt and stop.
              ii. else the max-entropy oracle returns λt such that fθt (λt ) ≤ ζ + ε/16. Let et = λt .
         (e) Compute the ellipsoid Et+1 to be the smallest ellipsoid containing the half-ellipsoid {θ ∈ Et :
             het , θ − θt i ≥ 0} and restricted to the affine space A= x = b.
         (f) t = t + 1 .

   4. Let T = t call the max-entropy oracle with input θT , ζ and ε/16.

   5. If g(θT ) ≥ ζ − ε/16

         (a) then return θT and stop.
         (b) else return g(θ • ) < ζ and stop (ζ is not a good guess for g(θ • )).
                                                                                                    η
It is clear that any call to the approximate optimization oracle is made for points θ which are in 2m  interior.
Thus, the running time of the algorithm is polynomially bounded by m and 1/ε for each call. To bound
                                                                       √
the number of iterations note that the starting ellipsoid has radius m and the final ellipsoid poly(1/m, ε ).
Hence, the number of iterations can be bounded by Theorem 2.14 by poly(m, 1/ε ). It remains to prove the
correctness of the algorithm.
     Towards this, let ζ ◦ be the largest guess of ζ for which the algorithms returns a positive answer and let
θ ◦ be the point returned by the algorithm for guess ζ ◦ . We return Z ◦ = eζ as our estimate of |M |. To
                                                                           def   ◦


complete the proof of Theorme 2.11, we show that Z ◦ satisfies

                                            (1 − ε )|M | ≤ Z ◦ ≤ (1 + ε )|M |.                               (5)

First, we prove the following lemma.
Lemma 7.7 Consider the run of the ellipsoid algorithm for a guess ζ and let the hyperplane {θ : het , θ −
θt i ≥ 0} be used as a separating hyperplane in some iteration of the algorithm. Then this separating
hyperplane does not cut any point θ such that θ ∈ Pη (M ) and g(θ ) ≥ ζ + ε/16.

Proof: If the hyperplane et is obtained in Step (3(b)ii), then it is clearly a valid inequality for Pη (M ) and
therefore does not cut off any of its points. Otherwise, suppose et = λt is obtained in Step (3(d)ii). Then
                                                                                 ε
                                        fθt (λt ) = hλt , θt i + ln Z λt ≤ ζ +      .
                                                                                 16
Hence,
                                                                                        ε
                             hλt , θ − θt i = fθ (λt ) − fθt (λt ) ≥ fθ (λt ) − ζ −        .                 (6)
                                                                                        16

                                                           27
Thus, by the assumption in the lemma,

                                             fθ (λt ) ≥ g(θ ) ≥ ζ + ε/16

and, therefore, by (6), θ satisfies the constraint het , θ − θt i ≥ 0.

We now show that ζ ◦ ≥ ln |M | − 416ε . Consider the run of the algorithm for
                                                                       
                                                      4ε            3ε
                                      ζ ∈ ln |M | − , ln |M | −
                                        ′
                                                                          .
                                                      16            16

Since
                                                          ε           ε
                                         g(θ • ) ≥ ln |M | − ≥ ζ′ + ,
                                                          16         16
θ cannot be cut off in any iteration by Lemma 7.7. If the ellipsoid returns an answer when run with guess
  •

ζ ′ then
                                                                4ε
                                          ζ ◦ ≥ ζ ′ ≥ ln |M | −
                                                                16
                                                                             εη
as claimed. Otherwise, we end with an ellipsoid ET of radius at most 16m         . Let θT be the center of the
                                                            εη
ellipsoid ET . Since θ ∈ ET , we have that kθ − θT k ≤ 16n . Since θ is in η -interior, from Lemma 7.5 it
                      •                         •                        •

follows that
                                   εη                   ε                      2ε
                    g(θT ) ≥ 1 −   16m
                                         g(θ • ) ≥ 1 −         g(θ • ) > ln |M | − .
                                    η                    16m                       16

This contradicts the fact that the algorithm did not output θT in the last iteration and asserted
                                                          ε             2ε
                                         g(θT ) ≤ ζ ′ +      ≤ ln |M | − .
                                                          16            16
Since ζ ◦ ≥ ln |M | − 416ε and ζ ◦ ≤ ln |M | + 16
                                               ε
                                                  . We obtain that (1 − ε )|M | ≤ Z ◦ ≤ (1 + ε )|M | proving (5)
and completing the proof of Theorem 2.11.


References
 [1] A. Asadpour, M. X. Goemans, A. Madry, S. Oveis-Gharan, and A. Saberi. An o(log n/ log log n)-
     approximation algorithm for the asymmetric traveling salesman problem. In SODA, pages 379–389,
     2010.

 [2] A. Asadpour and A. Saberi. An approximation algorithm for max-min fair allocation of indivisible
     goods. SIAM J. Comput., 39(7):2970–2989, 2010.

 [3] A. Ben-Tal and A. Nemirovski. Optimization III: Convex analysis, nonlinear programming theory,
     nonlinear programming algorithms. Lecture Notes, 2012.

 [4] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge University Press, Mar. 2004.

 [5] T. M. Cover and J. Thomas. Elements of information theory. Wiley, New York, 1991.

 [6] M. E. Dyer, A. M. Frieze, R. Kannan, A. Kapoor, L. Perkovic, and U. V. Vazirani. A mildly exponential
     time algorithm for approximating the number of solutions to a multidimensional knapsack problem.
     Combinatorics, Probability & Computing, 2:271–284, 1993.

                                                           28
 [7] J. Edmonds. Maximum matching and a polyhedron with 0, 1 vertices. Journal of Research of the
     National Bureau of Standards, 69:125–130, 1965.

 [8] J. Edmonds. Submodular functions, matroids, and certain polyhedra. Combinatorial structures and
     their applications, pages 69–87, 1970.

 [9] J. Edmonds. Matroids and the greedy algorithm. Mathematical Programming, 1:127–136, 1971.
     10.1007/BF01584082.

[10] K. Elbassioni and H. R. Tiwary. Complexity of approximating the vertex centroid of a polyhedron.
     Theoretical Computer Science, 421(0):56 – 61, 2012.

[11] T. Feder and M. Mihail. Balanced matroids. In S. R. Kosaraju, M. Fellows, A. Wigderson, and J. A.
     Ellis, editors, STOC, pages 26–38. ACM, 1992.

[12] A. M. Frieze, G. Galbiati, and F. Maffioli. On the worst-case performance of some algorithms for the
     asymmetric traveling salesman problem. Networks, 12(1):23–39, 1982.

[13] B. Garrett. Three observations on linear algebra. (spanish). Univ. Nac. Tucumn. Revista A., 5:147–151,
     1946.

[14] C. D. Godsil and G. Royle. Algebraic Graph Theory. Springer, 2001.

[15] M. Grötschel, L. Lovász, and A. Schrijver. Geometric Algorithms and Combinatorial Optimization,
     volume 2 of Algorithms and Combinatorics. Springer, second corrected edition edition, 1993.

[16] Z. Huang and S. Kannan. The exponential mechanism for social welfare: Private, truthful, and nearly
     optimal. In FOCS, pages 140–149, 2012.

[17] E. T. Jaynes. Information Theory and Statistical Mechanics. Physical Review, 106:620–630, May
     1957.

[18] E. T. Jaynes. Information Theory and Statistical Mechanics. II. Physical Review, 108:171–190, Oct.
     1957.

[19] M. Jerrum. A very simple algorithm for estimating the number of k-colorings of a low-degree graph.
     Random Struct. Algorithms, 7(2):157–166, 1995.

[20] M. Jerrum and A. Sinclair. Approximating the permanent. SIAM J. Comput., 18(6):1149–1178, 1989.

[21] M. Jerrum, A. Sinclair, and E. Vigoda. A polynomial-time approximation algorithm for the permanent
     of a matrix with nonnegative entries. J. ACM, 51(4):671–697, 2004.

[22] M. Jerrum, L. G. Valiant, and V. V. Vazirani. Random generation of combinatorial structures from a
     uniform distribution. Theor. Comput. Sci., 43:169–188, 1986.

[23] J. Kahn. Asymptotics of the chromatic index for multigraphs. J. Comb. Theory, Ser. B, 68(2):233–254,
     1996.

[24] J. Kahn. Asymptotics of the list-chromatic index for multigraphs.        Random Struct. Algorithms,
     17(2):117–156, 2000.

[25] J. Kahn and P. M. Kayll. On the stochastic independence properties of hard-core distributions. Com-
     binatorica, 17(3):369–391, 1997.

                                                    29
[26] J. N. Kapur. Maximum-Entropy Models in Science and Engineering. Wiley, New York, 1989.

[27] R. M. Karp and M. Luby. Monte-carlo algorithms for enumeration and reliability problems. In FOCS,
     pages 56–64. IEEE Computer Society, 1983.

[28] G. Kirchhoff. Ueber die auösung der gleichungen, auf welche man bei der untersuchung der linearen
     vertheilung galvanischer ströme geführt wird. Ann. Phys. und Chem., 72:497508, 1847.

[29] Y. Nesterov. Introductory lectures on convex programming. Volume I: Basic course, 1998.

[30] S. Oveis-Gharan, A. Saberi, and M. Singh. A randomized rounding approach to the traveling salesman
     problem. In R. Ostrovsky, editor, FOCS, pages 550–559. IEEE, 2011.

[31] M. W. Padberg and M. R. Rao. Odd minimum cut-sets and b-matchings. Mathematics of Operations
     Research, 7(1):67–80, 1982.

[32] A. Sinclair and M. Jerrum. Approximate counting, uniform generation and rapidly mixing Markov
     chains. Inf. Comput., 82(1):93–133, July 1989.

[33] L. J. Stockmeyer. On approximation algorithms for #p. SIAM J. Comput., 14(4):849–861, 1985.

[34] L. G. Valiant. The complexity of computing the permanent. Theor. Comput. Sci., 8:189–201, 1979.

[35] L. G. Valiant. The complexity of enumeration and reliability problems. SIAM J. Comput., 8(3):410–
     421, 1979.

[36] N. K. Vishnoi. A permanent approach to the traveling salesman problem. In FOCS, pages 76–80,
     2012.

[37] M. J. Wainwright and M. I. Jordan. Graphical models, exponential families, and variational inference.
     Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 1(1-2):1–305, 2008.




                                                   30
A    Omitted Proofs
A.1 Duality of the Max-Entropy Program
Lemma A.1 For a point θ in the interior of P(M ), there exists a unique distribution p⋆ which attains the
max-entropy while satisfying
                                            ∑ p⋆M 1M = θ .
                                                       M∈M

Moreover, there exists λ ⋆ : [m] 7→ R such that p⋆M ∝ e−λ (M) for each M ∈ M .
                                                                   ⋆




Proof: Consider the convex program for computing the maximum-entropy distribution with marginals θ
as in Figure 4. We first prove that the dual of this convex program is the one given in Figure 5. To see


                                                sup          ∑M∈M pM ln p1M
                                                s.t.
                                            ∀e ∈ [m] ∑M∈M , M∋e pM = θe                                      (7)
                                                       ∑M∈M pM = 1                                           (8)
                                        ∀M ∈ M                  pM ≥ 0                                       (9)


                                 Figure 4: Max-Entropy Program for (M , θ )



                                            fθ (λ ) = ∑e∈[m] θe λe + ln ∑M∈M e−λ (M)
                                                     def
                                  inf
                                 s.t.
                             ∀e ∈ [m]                           λe ∈ R                                      (10)


                           Figure 5: Dual of the Max-Entropy Program for (M , θ )

this consider multipliers λe for constraints (7) in Figure 4 and a multiplier z for the constraint (8). Then the
Lagrangian L(p, λ , z) is defined to be

                                    1
                        ∑ pM ln pM + ∑ λe (θe −                    ∑      pM ) + z(1 − ∑ pM ).
                       M∈M                   e∈[m]            M∈M , M∋e                  M∈M

This is the same as
                                        1
                          ∑ pM ln pM − ∑ pM λ (M) − z ∑ pM + ∑ λe θe + z.                                   (11)
                        M∈M                    M∈M                     M∈M       e∈[m]

           def
Let g(λ , z) = inf p≥0 L(p, λ , z). Thus, the p which achieves g(λ , z) can be obtained by taking partial deriva-
tives with respect to pM and setting them to 0 as follows.

                                                 ∂L        1
                               ∀M ∈ M                = ln    − 1 − λ (M) − z = 0.                           (12)
                                                ∂ pM      pM



                                                              31
Thus, pM = e−1−z−λ (M) for all M ∈ M . Summing this up over all M ∈ M we obtain that

                                            ∑ pM = e−1−z ∑ e−λ (M) .                                          (13)
                                           M∈M                   M∈M

For such a (p, λ , z), if we multiply each (12) by pM and add all of them up we obtain
                                                                        
                                              1
                                  ∑ pM ln pM − pM − pM λ (M) − zpM = 0,
                                M∈M

which implies that                                                     
                                                1
                                ∑        pM ln
                                               pM
                                                  − pM λ (M) − zpM          =   ∑ pM .
                               M∈M                                              M∈M

Hence, combining this with (11) and using (13), the dual becomes to find the infimum of g(λ , z) which is

                                          ∑ λe θe + z + e−1−z ∑ e−λ (M) .
                                         e∈[m]                    M∈M

Optimizing g(λ , z) over z one obtains that g(λ , z) is minimized when

                                             1 − e−1−z ∑ e−λ (M) = 0.
                                                           M∈M

Hence, z = ln ∑M∈M e−λ (M) − 1. Thus, the Lagrangian dual becomes to minimize

                                                 ∑ θe λe + ln ∑ e−λ (M) .
                                             e∈[m]           M∈M

This completes the proof that the dual of Figure 5 is the convex program in Figure 4.
    Since θ is in the interior of P(M ), the primal-dual pair satisfies Slater’s condition and strong duality
holds, see [4], implying that the optimum of both the programs is the same. Moreover, by the strict concavity
                                                                                     −λ ⋆ (M)
of the entropy function, the optimum is unique. Hence, at optimality, p⋆M = ∑ e e−λ ⋆ (N) where λ ⋆ is the
                                                                                   N∈M
optimal dual solution and p⋆ is the optimal primal solution.

A.2 Optimal and Near-Optimal Dual Solutions
In this section we first prove that if λ is a solution to the program in Figure 5 for (M , θ ) of value ζ , then so
is any λ + (A= )⊤ d for any d. Recall that (A= , b) are the equality constraints satisfied by all vertices of M .
Hence, in our search for the optimal solution to the dual convex program, we restrict ourselves to the space
of λ s.t. A= λ = 0.

Lemma A.2 (Same as Lemma 2.5) fθ (λ ) = fθ (λ + (A=)⊤ d) for any d.

Proof: First, note that hλ + (A= )⊤ d, θ i = hλ , θ i+ h(A= )⊤ d, θ i. Note that θ can be written as ∑M∈M pM 1M
and A= 1M = b for all M ∈ M . Hence,

                         hλ + (A= )⊤ d, θ i = hλ , θ i + ∑ pM hd, bi = hλ , θ i + hd, bi
                                                            M∈M

since ∑M∈M pM = 1. On the other hand note that

                               ln ∑ e−hλ +(A ) d,1M i = ln e−hd,bi ∑ e−hλ ,1M i
                                                     = ⊤


                                 M∈M                                    M∈M


                                                            32
which equals
                             −hd, bi + ln ∑ e−hλ ,1M i = −hd, bi + ln ∑ e−λ (M) .
                                            M∈M                                   M∈M

Combining, we obtain that fθ (λ + (A= )⊤ d) equals

                      hλ + (A=)⊤ d, θ i + ln ∑ e−hλ +(A ) d,1M i = hλ , θ i + ln ∑ e−λ (M)
                                                            = ⊤


                                              M∈M                                         M∈M

which equals fθ (λ ). This completes the proof of the lemma.

Thus, we can assume that A= λ ⋆ = 0 where λ ⋆ is the optimal solution for the program of Figure 5 for (M , θ ).
    Next we prove that if λ is such that fθ (λ ) is close to fθ (λ ⋆ ), then pλ and pλ are close to each other. We
                                                                                      ⋆


relate the Kullback-Leibler distance between pλ and pλ to fθ (λ ) − fθ (λ ⋆ ). In particular θ λ and θ are close
                                                            ⋆


to each other. Before we state this lemma, we recall some basic measures of proximity between probability
distributions.

Definition A.3 Let p, q be two probability distributions over the same space Ω. The following are natural
measures of distances.
                  def
   1. kp − qkTV = maxS⊆Ω |p(S) − q(S)|.
                def
   2. kp − qk1 = ∑ω |p(ω ) − q(ω )|.

   3. If p, q > 0, then the Kullback-Leibler distance between them is defined to be

                                                                                p(ω )
                                              DKL (pkq) = ∑ p(ω ) ln
                                                          def
                                                                                      .
                                                                ω               q(ω )

       This distance function is always non-negative but not necessarily symmetric.

The following lemma shows a close relation between the dual solutions and Kullback-Leibler distance be-
tween the corresponding primal distributions.

Lemma A.4 Suppose λ is such that fθ (λ ) ≤ fθ (λ ⋆ ) + ε where λ ⋆ is the optimum dual solution for the
instance (M , θ ). Let pλ , pλ be the probability distributions corresponding to λ and λ ⋆ respectively:
                              ⋆




                                          e−λ (M)                                e−λ (M)
                                                                                      ⋆

                              pλM =                                  λ ⋆ def
                                  def
                                                         and        pM   =                  .
                                        ∑N∈M e−λ (N)                           ∑N∈M e−λ (N)
                                                                                        ⋆



Then
                                        fθ (λ ) − fθ (λ ⋆ ) = DKL (pλ kpλ ) = ε .
                                                                         ⋆




Proof: Let Z λ , Z λ denote ∑M∈M e−λ (M) and ∑M∈M e−λ (M) respectively. Then, it follows from optimality
                      ⋆                                             ⋆


of λ ⋆ that
                                             ∑M∈M , M∋e e−λ (M)
                                                           ⋆

                                        θe =                    .                                  (14)
                                                    Zλ ⋆
Hence,
                                                       1               1
                              DKL (p⋆ kp) = ∑ p⋆M ln      − ∑ p⋆M ln ⋆
                                            M∈M       pM M∈M          pM



                                                          33
which, since pM = e−λ (M)/Z λ is
                                                                                           1
                                     ∑ p⋆M ln Z λ + ∑ p⋆M λ (M) − ∑ p⋆M ln p⋆ .
                                   M∈M                 M∈M                  M∈M            M

This is equal to
                                           ln Z λ − fθ (λ ⋆ ) + ∑ λe        ∑       p⋆M
                                                               e∈[m]    M∈M , M∋e

                                     = ln Z λ − fθ (λ ⋆ ) + hλ , θ i = fθ (λ ) − fθ (λ ⋆ ).
Here, we have used (14). Hence, DKL (p⋆ kp) = fθ (λ ) − fθ (λ ⋆ ) ≤ ε .

It is well-known, see [5] Lemma 12.6.1, pp. 300-301, that for probability distributions p, q over the same
sample space                                      p             
                                   kp − qkTV ≤ O       DKL (pkq) .                                     (15)
Hence, we obtain the following as a corollary to Lemma A.4.
                                                                                                   √
Corollary A.5 Let λ be such that fθ (λ ) ≤ fθ (λ ⋆ ) + ε . Then, for all e ∈ [m], |θeλ − θeλ | ≤ O( ε ).
                                                                                            ⋆




Proof: This follows from the fact that

                                                |θeλ − θeλ | ≤ kpλ − pλ kTV
                                                           ⋆                ⋆




which is at most                q                            p                          √
                                           (pλ kpλ )                fθ (λ ) − fθ (λ ⋆ ) = O( ε ).
                                              ⋆
                            O        DKL                 =O




B Generalized Counting and Minimizing Kullback-Leibler Divergence
In this section, we outline how to obtain algorithms for generalized approximate counting from max-entropy
oracles. Recall that the generalized approximate counting problem is: Given ε > 0 and weights µ ∈ Rm ,
                  µ
output Zeµ and Zee for each e ∈ [m] such that the following guarantees hold.
   1. (1 − ε )Z µ ≤ Zeµ ≤ (1 + ε )Z µ and
                                  µ     µ
   2. for every e ∈ [m], (1 − ε )Ze ≤ Zee ≤ (1 + ε )Zeλ .
Here Z µ is defined to be ∑M∈M e−µ (M) . The running time should be a polynomial in m, 1/ε , log 1/α and
the number of bits required to represent e−µe for any e ∈ [m], or kµ k1 .10 Towards constructing such algo-
rithms, we need access to oracles that solve a more general problem than the max-entropy problem used
in Theorem 2.11, namely, min-Kullback-Leibler (KL)-divergence problem. This raises the issue that, while
Theorems 2.6 and 2.8 output solutions to max-entropy problem given access to generalized counting oracles,
to obtain a generalized counting oracle we need access to a minimum KL-divergence oracle. However, later
in this section we show that given a generalized counting oracle, we can not only solve the max-entropy
convex programs as in Theorem 2.8, but also the min KL-divergence program in a straightforward manner.
The convex program for the min-KL-divergence problem is given in Figure 6. Given a µ ∈ Rm , recall that pµ
                             µ def −µ (M)
is the product distribution pM = e Z µ . Observe that the objective is to find a distribution p that minimizes
  10 The number of bits needed to represent e−µe for any e ∈ [m], up to an additive error of 2−m2 , is max{poly(m), kµ k } for some
                                                                                                                        1
poly(m). Since all our running times depend on poly(m), we only track the dependence on kµ k1 .


                                                               34
                                                                µ
                                              sup ∑M∈M pM ln p p(M)
                                                                M
                                                                    + ln Z µ
                                              s.t.
                                        ∀e ∈ [m]      ∑M∈M , M∋e pM = θe
                                                        ∑M∈M pM = 1
                                     ∀M ∈ M                 pM ≥ 0


                              Figure 6: Min-KL-Divergence Program for (M , θ , µ )


                                  inf ∑e∈[m] θe λe + ln ∑M∈M e−λ (M)−µ (M) + ln Z µ
                                 s.t.
                             ∀e ∈ [m]                       λe ∈ R


                      Figure 7: Dual of the Min-KL-Divergence Program for (M , θ , µ )


the KL-divergence, up to a shift, between the distributions p and pµ . This follows since the objective can be
rewritten as
                                         pµ (M)
                               ∑ pM ln pM + ln Z µ = ln Z µ − DKL (pkpµ )
                             M∈M

where Z µ does not depend on the variable p but only on the input µ . The dual of this convex program is
given in Figure 7. We use the following to denote the objective function of the dual:
                                 µ
                                fθ (λ ) = ∑ θe λe + ln ∑ e−λ (M)−µ (M) + ln Z µ .
                                        def

                                              e∈[m]       M∈M

 When θ is in the interior of P(M ), strong duality holds between the programs of Figure 6 and 7. We
assume that we are given the following approximate oracle to solve the above set of convex programs.

Definition B.1 An approximate KL-optimization oracle for M , given a θ in the η -interior of P(M ), µ ∈
Rm , a ζ > 0, and an ε > 0, either
                         µ
   1. asserts that infλ fθ (λ ) ≥ ζ − ε or
                                        µ
   2. returns a λ ∈ Rm such that fθ (λ ) ≤ ζ + ε .

The oracle is assumed to be efficient, i.e., it runs in time polynomial in m, 1/ε , 1/η , the number of bits needed
to represent ζ and kµ k1 .

The following theorem is the appropriate generalization of Theorem 2.11 in this setting.

Theorem B.2 There exists an algorithm that, given a maximal set of linearly independent equalities (A= , b)
and a separation oracle for P(M ), a µ ∈ Rm , and an approximate KL-optimization oracle for M as above,
returns a Ze such that (1 − ε )Z µ ≤ Ze ≤ (1 + ε )Z µ . Assuming that the running times of the separation oracle
and the approximate KL oracle are polynomial in their respective input parameters, the running time of the
algorithm is bounded by a polynomial in m, 1/ε , the number of bits needed to represent (A= , b) and kµ k1 .



                                                          35
We omit the proof since it is a simple but tedious generalization of the proof of Theorem 2.11. We highlight
below the key additional points that must be taken into account. The algorithm in the proof of Theorem B.2
is obtained by using the ellipsoid algorithm to maximize the concave function

                                                       max gµ (θ )
                                                        θ
                                                        µ
over the interior of P(M ). Here, gµ (θ ) = minλ fθ (λ ). Indeed, the maximum is attained at θ ⋆ where
                                         def



                                                       ∑M:e∈M e−µ (M)
                                               θe⋆ =
                                                            Zµ
and the objective value at this maximum is ln Z µ . Thus, we use the ellipsoid algorithm to search for θ ⋆ . The
issue of interiority as in Lemma 7.2 is resolved by proving the following lemma.

            Given an ε > 0, there exists an η > 0 and θ such that θ is in η -interior of P(M ) and
Lemma B.3                                                         •             •

gµ (θ • ) ≥ 1 − 16mkε µ k1 ln Z µ ≥ ln Z µ − 16
                                             ε
                                                . Moreover, η is at least a polynomial in 1/m, ε and 1/kµ k1 .

Similarly, Lemma 7.5 can be generalized to show the following:

Lemma B.4 Let θ , θ ′ ∈ P(M ) such that kθ − θ ′ k ≤ ε and θ is in η -interior of P(M ). Then
                                                            
                                     µ                  ε
                                    g (θ ) ≥ 1 −
                                         ′
                                                               g(θ ).
                                                     η kµ k1

Using the above two lemmas it is straightforward to generalize the argument in Theorem 2.11 to prove
Theorem B.2.
   To complete the picture we show that, given access to a generalized counting oracle, we can solve the
above pair of convex programs. This gives the following theorem which is a generalization of Theorem 2.8.

Theorem B.5 There exists an algorithm that, given a maximal set of linearly independent equalities (A= , b)
and a generalized approximate counting oracle for P(M ) ⊆ Rm , a θ in the η -interior of P(M ), µ ∈ Rm
and an ε > 0, returns a λ ◦ such that
                                         µ           µ
                                        fθ (λ ◦ ) ≤ fθ (λ ⋆ ) + ε ,
where λ ⋆ is the optimal solution to the dual of the max-entropy convex program for (M , θ , µ ) from Figure
7. Assuming that the generalized approximate counting oracle is polynomial in its input parameters, the
running time of the algorithm is polynomial in m, 1/η , log 1/ε , the number of bits needed to represent θ and
(A= , b), and kµ k1 .

A similar theorem can be stated in the exact counting oracle setting, extending Theorem 2.6. The proof of
Theorem B.5 is quite straightforward and relies on the following lemma that states that the objective of the
primal convex program is just an additive shift from the objective of the maximum entropy convex program.
Thus, the primal optimum solution remains the same. This implies that the dual convex program can be
solved as in the proof of Theorem 2.8 with one additional call to the generalized approximate counting
oracle involving µ s.

Lemma B.6 Let p be any feasible solution to the primal convex program given in Figure 6. Then the
objective
                                     µ
                                    pM                      1
                         ∑ M pM + ln Z µ = ∑ pM ln pM − hθ , µ i.
                             p   ln
                        M∈M                      M∈M


                                                            36
Proof: We have
                        µ
                       pM                                  1
             ∑ pM ln   pM
                          + ln Z µ   =      ∑ pM ln pM + ∑ pM ln pMµ + ln Z µ
           M∈M                            M∈M                    M∈M
                                                           1                   e−µ (M)
                                     =      ∑ pM ln pM + ∑ pM ln                 Zµ
                                                                                       + ln Z µ
                                          M∈M                    M∈M
                                                1
                                     = ∑ pM ln    + ∑ pM (−µ (M)) + ∑ pM Z µ + ln Z µ
                                       M∈M     pM  M∈M             M∈M
                                                           1
                                     =      ∑ pM ln pM − ∑ µe ∑ pM
                                          M∈M                    e∈E       M:e∈M
                                                           1
                                     =      ∑ pM ln pM − ∑ µe θe
                                          M∈M                    e∈E

where we have used the facts that ∑M pM = 1 and ∑M:e∈M pM = θe since p satisfies the constraints of the
convex program in Figure 6.


C     2 → 2-norm of ∇ f
For a fixed θ , let
                                         f (λ ) = hθ , λ i + ln ∑ e−λ (M) .
                                               def
                                                                                                            (16)
                                                                 M∈M

Recall that k∇ f k2→2 is the 2 → 2 Lipschitz constant of ∇ f and is defined to be the smallest non-negative
number such that
                                ∇ f (λ ) − ∇ f (λ ′ ) 2 ≤ k∇ f k2→2 · kλ − λ ′ k2
for all λ , λ ′ . In this section, we show the following theorem, which can be used to give alternative gradient-
descent based proofs of Theorems 2.6 and 2.8.
                                                              √
Theorem C.1 Let f be defined as in (16). Then, k∇ f k2→2 ≤ O(m m).

Proof: Given λ1 and λ2 , let pλ1 and pλ2 be the corresponding product distributions and let θ1 and θ2 be the
corresponding marginals. We break the calculation of k∇ f k2→2 into two parts:
                                                 1                    1
                               kλ1 − λ2 k2 >     √ and kλ1 − λ2 k2 ≤ √ .
                                               10 m                 10 m

Estimating k∇ f k2→2 in the first case is straightforward. To see this, recall that

                                                     ∇ f (λi ) = θ − θi                                     (17)

for i = 1, 2. Thus,                                                √
                                                 k∇ f (λi )k2 ≤        m                                    (18)
since θ , θi ∈ P(M ) ⊆ [0, 1]m , which implies that θ − θi ∈ [−1, 1]m for i = 1, 2. Hence,
                                                                    √
                                        k∇ f (λ1 ) − ∇ f (λ2 )k2 ≤ 2 m.

Thus, when
                                                                   1
                                               kλ1 − λ2 k2 >       √ ,                                      (19)
                                                                 10 m

                                                            37
we obtain
                               ∆−ineq.                               (18) √                    1 (19)
    k∇ f (λ1 ) − ∇ f (λ2 )k2     ≤       k∇ f (λ1 )k2 + k∇ f (λ2 )k2 ≤ 2 m = 20m ·             √ < 20m · kλ1 − λ2 k2 .
                                                                                             10 m

Hence, we move on to proving the theorem in the case
                                                                              1
                                                      kλ1 − λ2 k2 ≤           √                                                (20)
                                                                            10 m

Towards this, define
                                                            def √
                                                          ε=       mkλ1 − λ2 k2 .                                              (21)
Note that by assumption (20), ε ≤ 1/10. It follows from (21) that for any M ∈ M ,

                                                    ∆−ineq.                                         Cau.−Sch. √
|λ1 (M)− λ2 (M)| =         ∑ ((λ1)e − (λ2)e )         ≤          ∑ |(λ1 )e − (λ2)e | ≤ kλ1 − λ2k1      ≤          mkλ1 − λ2 k2 = ε .
                       e∈M                                       e∈M
                                                                                                                               (22)
The following series of claims establishes Theorem C.1.
                       λ
Claim C.2 e−ε ≤ ZZ λ12 ≤ eε .

Proof: For each M ∈ M , (22) implies that

                                                                   e−λ1 (M)
                                                          e−ε ≤     − λ  (M)
                                                                             ≤ eε .                                            (23)
                                                                   e   2


Thus,
                                         e−λ1 (M) ∑M∈M e−λ1 (M)          e−λ1 (M)
                             e−ε ≤ min            ≤                ≤ max           ≤ eε .                                      (24)
                                     M∈M e−λ2 (M)   ∑M∈M e− λ2 (M)   M∈M e− λ2 (M)

Here, we have used the inequality that for non-negative numbers a1 , a2 , . . . and b1 , b2 , . . . ,
                                                            ai ∑i ai      ai
                                                    min       ≤      ≤ max .                                                   (25)
                                                      i     bi ∑i bi    i bi

The claim follows by combining (24) with the definition

                                                     ∑M∈M e−λ1 (M) Z λ1
                                                                  =     .
                                                     ∑M∈M e−λ2 (M) Z λ2


                                                λ
                                               pM1
Claim C.3 For each M ∈ M , e−2ε ≤               λ    ≤ e2ε .
                                               pM2

Proof: By definition,
                                                          pλM1   e−λ1 (M) Z λ2
                                                               =         ·     .
                                                          pλM2   e−λ2 (M) Z λ1
Since all the numbers involved in this product are positive, (23) and Claim C.2 imply that both the ratios
in the right hand side of the equation are bounded from below by e−ε and from above by eε . Hence, their
product is bounded from below by e−2ε and from above by e2ε , completing the proof of the claim.


                                                                       38
Claim C.4 For each e ∈ [m], e−2ε ≤ ((θθ12 ))ee ≤ e2ε .

Proof: By the definition of θ1 and θ2 ,
                                                                   λ
                                                 (θ1 )e ∑M∈M ,M∋e pM1
                                                       =               .
                                                 (θ2 )e ∑M∈M ,M∋e pλM2

Combining Claim C.3 and (25), we obtain that
                                                                           λ
                          −2ε                  pλM1       ∑M∈M ,M∋e pM1          pλM1
                        e       ≤      min            ≤                ≤  max         ≤ e2ε ,
                                    M∈M ,M∋e pλ2                     λ            λ
                                                          ∑M∈M ,M∋e pM2 M∈M ,M∋e pM2
                                              M

completing the proof of the claim.

Claim C.5 For ε ≤ 1/10, kθ1 − θ2 k1 ≤ 3ε m.

Proof: By definition
                                             kθ1 − θ2 k1 = ∑ |(θ1 )e − (θ2 )e |
                                                              e∈[m]

Since θ1 , θ2 ≥ 0, Claim C.4 implies that for each e ∈ [m],

                                  (e−2ε − 1)(θ2 )e ≤ (θ1 )e − (θ2 )e ≤ (e2ε − 1)(θ2 )e .

Since max{|e−2ε − 1|, |e2ε − 1|} ≤ 3ε for ε ≤ 1/10, the above inequality reduces to, for each e ∈ [m],

                                                |(θ1 )e − (θ2 )e | ≤ 3ε (θ2 )e .

Thus,
                            kθ1 − θ2 k1 = ∑ |(θ1 )e − (θ2 )e | ≤ ∑ 3ε (θ2 )e ≤ 3ε m
                                               e∈[m]                           e∈[m]

since θ2 ≥ 0 and θ2   ∈ P(M ) ⊆ [0, 1]m . This completes the proof of the claim.

Finally, to complete the proof of Theorem C.1, note that when (20) holds,

                                (17)              ℓ2 (x,y)≤ℓ1 (x,y)                 Claim C.4       (21) √
     k∇ f (λ1 ) − ∇ f (λ2 )k2 = kθ1 − θ2 k2               ≤           kθ1 − θ2 k1      ≤        3mε = 3m mkλ1 − λ2 k2 .




                                                                39
