                                                         SECTIONAL NONASSOCIATIVITY OF METRIZED ALGEBRAS

                                                                                              DANIEL J. F. FOX




arXiv:2211.01073v3 [math.RA] 18 Jan 2024
                                                   Abstract. The sectional nonassociativity of a metrized (not necessarily associative or unital) algebra is
                                                   deﬁned analogously to the sectional curvature of a pseudo-Riemannian metric, with the associator in place of
                                                   the Levi-Civita covariant derivative. For commutative real algebras nonnegative sectional nonassociativity
                                                   is usually called the Norton inequality, while a sharp upper bound on the sectional nonassociativity of
                                                   the Jordan algebra of Hermitian matrices over a real Hurwitz algebra is closely related to the Böttcher-
                                                   Wenzel-Chern-do Carmo-Kobayashi inequality. These and other basic examples are explained, and there are
                                                   described some consequences of bounds on sectional nonassociativity for commutative algebras. A technical
                                                   point of interest is that the results work over the octonions as well as the associative Hurwitz algebras.




                                                                                                  Contents
                                              1. Introduction                                                                                                      1
                                              2. Preliminaries                                                                                                     3
                                              3. The analogy between multiplications and connections                                                               4
                                              4. Sectional nonassociativity                                                                                        8
                                              5. Examples of algebras with constant sectional nonassociativity                                                    12
                                              6. Examples of bounds on sectional nonassociativity                                                                 15
                                              7. The Chern-do Carmo-Kobayashi inequality over real Hurwitz algebras                                               19
                                              8. Consequences for commutative algebras of conditions on sectional nonassociativity                                22
                                              References                                                                                                          25



                                                                                             1. Introduction
                                              For an algebra pA, ˝q equipped with a metric, meaning a nondegenerate symmetric bilinear form, that is
                                           invariant, meaning hpx ˝ y, zq “ hpx, y ˝ zq for all x, y, z P A, the sectional nonassociativity Kpx, yq of the
                                           h-nondegenerate subspace Spantx, yu Ă A is defined in [18] to be
                                                                                             hpx ˝ x, y ˝ yq ´ hpx ˝ y, y ˝ xq
                                           (1.1)                                Kpx, yq “                                      .
                                                                                                hpx, xqhpy, yq ´ hpx, yq2
                                           (Because ˝ need not be commutative or anticommutative, the order of x and y in (1.1) matters.) The
                                           sectional nonassociativity is analogous to the sectional curvature of the Levi-Civita connection of a pseudo-
                                           Riemannian metric, with the multiplication and its associator in place of the covariant derivative and its
                                           curvature. Section 3 describes in detail this analogy between the multiplication of an algebra an torsion-free
                                           connection on a tangent bundle. The notion itself, and its basic properties, are given in Section 4.
                                              Quantitative bounds on the sectional nonassociativity of a metrized real algebra encompass apparently
                                           unrelated inequalities such as the Böttcher-Wenzel-Chern-do Carmo-Kobayashi inequality bounding the norm
                                           of a matrix commutator and the Norton inequality asserting the nonnegativity of the quadratic expression
                                           hpx ˝ x, y ˝ yq ´ hpx ˝ y, x ˝ yq for certain metrized commutative algebras arising in the theory of vertex
                                           operator algebras whose most famous representative is the 196844-dimensional Griess algebra on which the
                                           monster finite simple group acts by automorphisms.
                                              It is apparent from (1.1) that, for a commutative algebra, the Norton inequality may be rephrased as
                                           nonnegative sectional nonassociativity. On the other hand, if pA, r ¨ , ¨ s, hq is a metrized anticommutative
                                                                                                        1
2                                                DANIEL J. F. FOX


algebra (for example, a Lie or Malcev algebra with h a multiple of its Killing form), (1.1) takes the form
                                                      hprx, ys, rx, ysq
(1.2)                                Kpx, yq “                             .
                                                 hpx, xqhpy, yq ´ hpx, yq2

If h is positive definite, the right-hand side of (1.2) is bounded from above by hprx,ys,rx,ysq
                                                                                       hpx,xqhpy,yq and, by the
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, this quantity is bounded from above. The Böttcher-Wenzel inequality asserts
that for the algebra Mpn, Cq of n ˆ n complex matrices metrized by the Frobenius norm this quantity is
bounded from above by 2 (which is better than the constant obtained by applying Cauchy-Schwarz), and
characterizes the case of equality. The Böttcher-Wenzel inequality can be interpreted as an upper bound on
the sectional nonassociativity of the Lie algebra of n ˆ n matrices Mpn, Cq with the usual matrix commutator.
   For an anticommutative algebra, (1.2) is obviously nonnegative, with equality if and only if rx, ys “ 0, so
that characterization of the equality case in the lower bound amounts to characterization of commuting pairs
of elements. On the other hand, for a commutative algebra, (1.1) can take both signs. These observations
suggest looking for similar bounds for other metrized algebras, for example commutative algebras or other
sorts of Lie algebras.
   The extreme case of equal upper and lower bounds is that of constant sectional nonassociativity. This is
closely related to the notion of projective associativity of commutative algebras studied in [18]. Although it
is not solved here, the classification of metrized algebras with constant sectional nonassociativity appears an
accessible problem. However, if anisotropy of the metric is not assumed, examples abound and it is still not
clear what form the classification will take even in the simplest case of vanishing sectional nonassociativity.
Essentially by definition, associative and alternative algebras have vanishing sectional nonassociativity. In
Section 5, it is shown that both a quadratic 2-step nilpotent Lie algebra and a metrized antiflexible algebra
have vanishing sectional nonassociativity, and nontrivial examples of such algebras are given. In particular,
Example 5.2 exhibits a Euclidean metrized antiflexible algebra with vanishing sectional nonassociativity
whose underlying Lie algebra is sop3q (which has constant sectional nonassociativity 1 when metrized by
the negative of its Killing form) and whose underlying commutative algebra has constant negative sectional
nonassociativity. (It gives a similar example with underlying Lie algebra slp2, Rq.)
   Section 5 describes other examples of algebras having constant sectional nonassociativity. Example 5.3
explains that cross product algebras could be defined as antisymmetric metrized algebras having constant
negative sectional nonassociativity. Example 5.6 describes a one-parameter family of pairwise nonisomorphic
3-dimensional metrized commutative algebras having constant sectional nonassociativities in p´8, 1{4s.
   Section 6 gives examples of algebras for which there can be established bounds on the sectional nonasso-
ciativities. Example 6.1 recalls a result of Miyamoto shows that the Griess algebras of OZ vertex operator
algebras satisfy the Norton inequality. In this context it would be interesting to establish upper bounds.
Example 6.2 shows that symmetric composition algebras such as para-Hurwitz and Okubo algebras have
sectional nonassociativity bounded between ´1 and 1.
   The remainder of Section 6 is devoted to the proof of Theorem 6.3, which gives sharp upper and lower
bounds on the sectional nonassociativities of a simple Euclidean Jordan algebra of rank at least 3 together
with characterization of the cases of equality in the bounds. These algebras are simply the Jordan algebras
Hermpn, hq of Hermitian matrices over the real Hurwitz algebras h P tR, C, H, Ou, where n ě 3, and, in the
case of the octonions, O, attention is restricted to n “ 3. Theorem 6.3 states that the sectional nonassocia-
tivity, Kpx, yq, defined in Definition 4.1, of the subspace spanned by linearly independent x, y P Hermpn, hq
satisfies
(1.3)                                   0 ď Kpx, yq “ Kh,‹ px, yq ď n2 ,
and characterizes the subspaces for equality is obtained in the upper and lower bound. The lower bound is the
Norton inequality. The sharp upper bound is deduced as a consequence of the Chern-do Carmo-Kobayashi
inequality for the commutators of Hermitian matrices. This requires some argument to extend this inequality
to the octonions that is formulated as Lemma 7.2; this extension may be of independent interest.
   These results are of interest from the point of view of applications of the Böttcher-Wenzel-Chern-do
Carmo-Kobayashi inequality. This inequality is recalled in section 7 and it is shown that the Chern-do
                           SECTIONAL NONASSOCIATIVITY OF METRIZED ALGEBRAS                                      3


Carmo-Kobayashi inequality holds for Hermpn, Hq and partially for Hermp3, Oq. These refinements, Theorem
7.1 and the variant Lemma 7.2, valid over a real Hurwitz algebra, are used in the proof of Theorem 6.3 to
estimate the sectional nonassociativity of the deunitalization of a simple Euclidean Jordan algebra. In a
sense, this amounts to reinterpreting the Böttcher-Wenzel-Chern-do Carmo-Kobayashi inequalities as upper
bounds on sectional nonassociativity.
    The notion of sectional nonassociativity facilitates quantifications of nonassociativity both more refined
and less exact than nonnegativity or nonpositivity, and these may in turn suggest refinements of the Böttcher-
Wenzel inequality. More generally, the sectional nonassociativity is manifestly invariant under isometric
algebra automorphisms and its relation with other similar quantities deserves to be explored more. See
Remark 7.5 for further comments in this direction.
    Not many examples of commutative algebras satisfying the Norton inequality are known and the descrip-
tion of such algebras is interesting and their classification, possibly with additional hypotheses, may be a
possibly tractable problem. The main known examples are the Griess algebras of certain vertex operator
algebras [43] and their subalgebras, as is explained next in Example 6.1, and, by Theorem 6.3, the simple
Euclidean Jordan algebras, as is shown in Theorem 6.3. (It is known that most of the simple Euclidean Jor-
dan algebras can also be obtained as Griess algebras of certain vertex operator algebras [3, 35, 68].) Further
examples are the Majorana algebras introduced by A. A. Ivanov [28, 29] which are defined by a list of axioms
including the Norton inequality. See [65] for a family of examples depending on a parameter and further
references.
    More generally, the notion of sectional nonassociativity should help to organize the study of metrized
algebras in the same manner that restriction on curvature quantities help to organize the study of Riemannian
manifolds. Typically classes of algebras are defined by identities. From the point of view advocated here
this is something like studying symmetric spaces (whose curvature tensors satisfy algebraic equalities).
    Section 8 presents some general consequences for commutative algebras of bounds on sectional nonassocia-
tivity. Combined with the notion of sectional nonassociativity, results about the eigenvectors and eigenvalues
of the structure tensor can be used to relate the existence and description of idempotents and square-zero
elements to conditions involving sectional nonassociativity. Since an automorphism of the algebra must per-
mute its idempotents and square-zero elements, such results yield results about the size of the automorphism
group. For example, Theorem 8.1 shows that a Euclidean metrized commutative algebra has finite automor-
phism group if its sectional nonassociativity is negative or if its sectional nonassociativity is nonpositive
and the algebra contains no trivial subalgebra. In the other direction, Lemma 8.5 shows that nonnegative
sectional nonassociativity precludes existence of 2-nilpotents. The flavor of such results conforms broadly
with the geometric analogy. For example, the automorphism group of a negatively curved Riemann surface
is finite, while the (positively curved) sphere has a large continuous group of automorphisms.
    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents basic definitions related to metrized algebras. Section
3 shows that the analogy between multiplications and covariant derivatives has substance and presents results
that help motivate the definition of sectional nonassociativity given in Section 4. Section 4 also describes the
most basic properties of the sectional nonassociativity. Section 5 presents examples having constant sectional
nonassociativity; these include Hurwitz algebras, cross-product algebras, antiflexible algebras, and some novel
three-dimensional algebras. Section 6 describes examples satisfying bounds on sectional nonassociativity
generalizing the Norton inequality; these include symmetric composition algebras, Griess algebras of OZ
vertez operator algebras, and the simple Euclidean Jordan algebras. The proof of the upper bound on the
sectional nonassociativity of simple Euclidean Jordan algebras given in Theorem 6.3 requires the Böttcher-
Wenzel-Chen-do Carmo-Kobayashi inequality for matrices over a Hurwitz algebra. Section 7 describes this
and addresses what happens over the octonions. Finally, Section 8 presents some general consequences for
commutative algebras of bounds on sectional nonassociativity.


                                              2. Preliminaries
  Let k be a field. Everywhere in the paper there is assumed char k ﬄ 6, although sometimes assumptions
on char k are stated explicitly for clarity.
4                                                 DANIEL J. F. FOX


   An algebra means a finite-dimensional vector space A over k equipped with a bilinear multiplication
˝ : A ˆ A Ñ A. It need not be associative, commutative, or unital. The left and right multiplication
endomorphisms L˝ , R˝ : A Ñ EndpAq are defined by L˝ pxqy “ x ˝ y “ R˝ pyqx.
   An algebra is metrized if it is equipped with a metric, meaning a nondegenerate symmetric bilinear form,
h, that is invariant (also called associative), meaning that hpx ˝ y, zq “ hpx, y ˝ zq for all x, y, z P A.
   A Euclidean metrized algebra is a real algebra metrized by a positive definite metric. (Essentially all
results in the paper stated for Euclidean metrized algebras remain true with a real-closed base field in place
of R, but it would be distracting to state and prove them in this generality.) That an algebra be Euclidean
metrized means that the adjoint of the left multiplication endomorphism L˝ pxq equals the right multiplica-
tion endomorphism R˝ pxq. Consequently, for a Euclidean metrized commutative algebra the multiplication
endomorphisms L˝ pxq “ R˝ pxq are self-adjoint with respect to a positive definite symmetric bilinear form.
Example 2.1. A semisimple real Lie algebra pg, ˝q is metrized by the negative h “ ´Bg of its Killing
form Bg “ tr L˝ pxqL˝ pyq. It is Euclidean in the above sense if it is moreover compact. More generally, an
anticommutative algebra pA, ˝q is Malcev if
(2.1)     px ˝ yq ˝ px ˝ zq “ ppx ˝ yq ˝ zq ˝ x ` ppy ˝ zq ˝ xq ˝ x ` ppz ˝ xq ˝ xq ˝ y,    for all x, y, z P A.
for all x, y, z P A. Any Lie algebra is Malcev. By [56, Theorem 7.16] the Killing form τ˝ px, yq “ tr L˝ pxqL˝ pyq
of a Malcev algebra is invariant. The identity (2.1) can be written L˝ px ˝ yqL˝ pxq ` L˝ pxqL˝ px ˝ yq “
rL˝ pxq2 , L˝ pyqs and tracing this shows τ˝ px ˝ y, xq “ τ˝ px, y ˝ xq. Polarizing this in x yields the claim. Ÿ
   Lemma 2.1 generalizes the statement that a Lie algebra admitting an invariant nondegenerate bilinear
form has dimension at least 3.
Lemma 2.1. A two-dimensional metrized algebra pA, ˝, hq is commutative.
Proof. If u and v span A, then hpu ˝ v, uq “ hpu, u ˝ vq “ hpu ˝ u, vq “ hpv, u ˝ uq “ hpv ˝ u, uq and, similarly,
hpu ˝ v, vq “ hpv ˝ u, vq. By the nondegeneracy of h this implies u ˝ v “ v ˝ u, which suffices to show the
claim.                                                                                                         
    The associator of an algebra is the trilinear map b3 A˚ Ñ A defined by
(2.2)            rx, y, zs “ A˝ px, yqz “ pL˝ px ˝ yq ´ L˝ pxqL˝ pyqqz “ px ˝ yq ˝ z ´ x ˝ py ˝ zq.
The map A˝ px, yq P EndpAq is the (left) associator endomorphism.
Example 2.2. A commutative algebra is Jordan if rx ˝ x, y, xs “ 0 for all x, y, P A. For a Jordan algebra, the
bilinear form tr L˝ px ˝ yq is invariant, so it is metrized if this bilinear form is nondegenerate. A real Jordan
algebra is Euclidean if it is formally real, meaning that a sum of squares equals zero if and only if each of the
elements squares is zero. A real Jordan algebra is Euclidean as a Jordan algebra if and only if tr L˝ px ˝ yq
is positive definite [30].                                                                                     Ÿ
Example 2.3. A composition algebra is an algebra pA, ˝, qq with a nondegenerate quadratic form q that is
multiplicative meaning qpx ˝ yq “ qpxqqpyq for all x, y P A. A Hurwitz algebra is a unital composition algebra
pA, ˝, e, qq. By the Hurwitz theorem, a real Hurwitz algebra is one of the real field R, the complex field C, the
quaternions H, or the octonions O. For background on composition and Hurwitz algebras see [14, 32, 59].
   A Hurwitz algebra carries the nondegenerate symmetric bilinear form hpx, yq “ qpx ` yq ´ qpxq ´ qpyq
obtained from q by linearization. By the nondegeneracy and multiplicativity of q, hpe, eq “ 2qpeq “ 2. The
standard involution of pA, ˝, e, qq is the algebra antiautomorphism defined by x̄ “ hpx, eqe ´ x. Its fixed point
set is the subalgebra generated by e and is isomorphic to R. Taking z “ e yields hpx, yqe “ xȳ `y x̄ “ hpx̄, ȳqe.
A Hurwitz algebra equipped with its standard involution is a metrized algebra with involution in the sense
of [2], meaning that h is involutively invariant in the sense that hpx, z ˝ ȳq “ hpx ˝ y, zq “ hpy, x̄ ˝ zq for all
x, y, z P A. Note that, except when h “ k, h is not invariant, so ph, ˝, hq is not metrized as an algebra.        Ÿ

                     3. The analogy between multiplications and connections
  The following analogy between algebras and connections illuminates the point of view taken here. The
multiplication ˝ is analogous to a torsion-free connection on a tangent bundle, and the associator corresponds
                            SECTIONAL NONASSOCIATIVITY OF METRIZED ALGEBRAS                                        5


to (the negative of) the second covariant derivative. In fact, a torsion-free connection on a tangent bundle
can be regarded as a Lie-admissible product on the space of vector fields, and in that setting the sectional
nonassociativity defined in Section 4 is simply the sectional curvature. However that setting differs from that
considered here in several ways. First, the space of vector fields is infinite-dimensional. Second, the covariant
derivative is a C 8 -module map in its first argument. A general context encompassing both finite-dimensional
algebras and connections on tangent bundles is algebroids, but this is not discussed here.
    The notions suggested by the multiplication-connection analogy prove surprisingly robust and provide
principles for organizing the zoo of general algebras different from those that arise from classical points of
view. In particular, they offer possibilities for quantifying nonassociativity that turn out to be quite useful.
    This idea has been discussed in similar terms in [26] in the context of Lie-admissible algebras and has roots
in foundational articles on left-symmetric algebras [60, 63]. In [8] there are considered algebras satisfying
identities like those treated in this section from the more sophisticated point of view of Koszul duality
of operads. The unrelated duality given by the adjoint multiplication considered here is motivated by
considerations from affine differential geometry [19]. These ideas are expounded in the more limited context
of metrized commutative algebras in [18, 20].
    The analogy is implemented in practice in the following way. The space of connections on a bundle is an
affine space. A reference connection is fixed and then any other connection is identified with a tensor. Any
expression involving this connection involves some derivatives and some purely algebraic part expressible in
terms of this tensor. The purely algebraic expression make sense also for the structure tensor of an algebra.
For example, the covariant derivative of a metric g with respect to a torsion-free affine connection ∇ is
p∇X gqpY, Zq “ XpgpY, Zqq ´ gp∇X Y, Zq ´ gpY, ∇X Zq. The corresponding expression for a metric g on an
algebra pA, ˝q is ´gpx ˝ y, zq ´ gpy, x ˝ zq. The vanishing of this expression is analogous to the metric tensor
being parallel. This kind of invariance should probably be properly formulated as a cohomological condition,
but it is not clear how to give sense to this last claim when working in the generality considered here.
    In the analogy, the underlying bracket is regarded as background information of a topological rather than
geometric nature, analogous to the Lie algebra of vector fields on a smooth manifold.
    Applying the connection-algebra analogy to the curvature of an affine connection yields the following
definitions.
    Decomposing the product ˝ by symmetries leads to two underlying algebras, from which pA, ˝q can be
reconstructed (except when char k “ 2). The underlying bracket (or commutator) of the algebra pA, ˝q is the
commutator defined by rx, ys “ x ˝ y ´ y ˝ x and pA, r ¨ , ¨ sq is the underlying antisymmetric algebra. The
underlying commutative algebra of an algebra pA, ˝q is A equipped with the product x d y “ x ˝ y ` y ˝ x.
    The multiplication ˝t adjoint to ˝ is that defined by x ˝t y “ ´y ˝ x. It is the negative of the opposite
multiplication. By definition, that L˝t “ ´R˝ and R˝t “ ´L˝ . The sign in the definition of the adjoint
multiplication ˝t is chosen so that ˝ and the adjoint product ˝t have the same underlying bracket.
    The curvature r : A b A Ñ EndpAq and adjoint curvature r̄ : A b A Ñ EndpAq of pA, ˝q are defined by

         rpx, yqz “ ´rx, y, zs ` ry, x, zs “ prL˝ pxq, L˝ pyqs ´ L˝ prx, ysqq z “ pA˝ py, xq ´ A˝ px, yqqz,
(3.1)
         r̄px, yqz “ ´rz, x, ys ` rz, y, xs “ prR˝ pxq, R˝ pyqs ` R˝ prx, ysqq z “ pA˝t py, xq ´ A˝t px, yqqz.

The adjoint curvature of ˝ is the curvature of the adjoint multiplication ˝t and vice-versa. For any tensorial
object constructed from a multiplication ˝ there is a corresponding tensorial object constructed in the same
way from the adjoint multiplication ˝t , and it is denoted by putting a ¯ over the notation indicating the
object associated with ˝. This convention is consistent with the notation r and r̄.
  The algebra has self-adjoint curvature if r “ r̄ and anti-self-adjoint curvature if r “ ´r̄.
Example 3.1. An algebra pA, ˝q is flexible if rx, y, xs “ 0 for all x, y P A. A commutative or anticommutative
algebra is flexible. The symmetric composition algebras discussed in Example 6.2 are also flexible. It is
evident from (3.1) that a flexible algebra has self-adjoint curvature.                                      Ÿ
Example 3.2. An algebra pA, ˝q is antiflexible if rx, y, zs “ rz, y, xs for all x, y, z P A. It is evident from (3.1)
that an antiflexible algebra has anti-self-adjoint curvature.                                                      Ÿ
6                                                     DANIEL J. F. FOX


Example 3.3. An algebra is left-symmetric (also called pre-Lie or Vinberg) if A˝ px, yq “ A˝ py, xq for all
x, y P A. It is evident from (3.1) that an algebra is left-symmetric if and only if its curvature r vanishes. The
vanishing of the adjoint curvature is equivalent to the left symmetry of the adjoint multiplication, or that
the given multiplication is right-symmetric.
   Any left-symmetric algebra that is not right-symmetric gives an example of an algebra pA, ˝q not iso-
morphic to its adjoint pA, ˝t q. More generally, an algebra that does not have self-adjoint curvature is not
isomorphic to its adjoint algebra.                                                                             Ÿ
Example 3.4. An awkward aspect of the conventions here is that the underlying bracket of an anticommu-
tative algebra is twice the original bracket, and this needs to be remembered when interpreting (3.1).
   As a Lie algebra pg, r ¨ , ¨ sq is flexible, it has self-adjoint curvature, and from (3.1) it follows that r̄px, yq “
rpx, yq “ ´ adg prx, ysq “ ´radg pxq, adg pyqs. Consequently any 2-step nilpotent Lie algebra provides an
example of a nonassociative algebra for which both r and r̄ vanish identically.                                        Ÿ
   Define A˝ pxq “ Lr ¨ , ¨ s pxq “ L˝ pxq ´ R˝ pxq, so that A˝ pxqy “ rx, ys, and define S˝ pxq “ Ld pxq “
L˝ pxq ` R˝ pxq, so that S˝ pxqy “ x d y. Straightforward computations using (3.1) show that, in any algebra,
(3.2)          rA˝ pxq, S˝ pyqs ´ S˝ pA˝ pxqyq “ rpx, yq ´ r̄px, yq ´ rR˝ pxq, L˝ pyqs ´ rR˝ pyq, L˝ pxqs.
Decomposing (3.2) into its parts symmetric and antisymmetric in x and y yields the relations
(3.3)                rA˝ pxq, S˝ pyqs ` rA˝ pyq, S˝ pxqs “ ´2rR˝ pxq, L˝ pyqs ´ 2rR˝ pyq, L˝ pxqs,
and
           rpx, yqx ´ r̄px, yqz “ ´rx, y, zs ` rz, x, ys ´ rz, y, xs ` ry, x, zs
(3.4)                             “ prL˝ pxq, R˝ pzqs ` rL˝ pzq, R˝ pxqsq y ´ prL˝ pyq, R˝ pzqs ` rR˝ pyq, L˝ pzqsq x,
                                  “ 12 rA˝ pxq, S˝ pyqs ´ 12 rA˝ pyq, S˝ pxqs ´ S˝ prx, ysq z,
                                    `                                                      ˘

for all x, y, z P A (the validity of the last equality needs char k ‰ 2).
Lemma 3.1. If char k ‰ 2, the following conditions on a k-algebra pA, ˝q are equivalent.
   (1) rA˝ pxq, S˝ pxqs “ 0 for all x P A.
   (2) rR˝ pxq, L˝ pyqs “ ´rR˝ pyq, L˝ pxqs for all x, y P A.
   (3) pA, ˝q is flexible.
Over a field of any characteristic, a flexible algebra satisfies (1) and (2) and has self-adjoint curvature.
Proof. By definition, pA, ˝q is flexible if and only if rR˝ pxq, L˝ pxqs “ 0 for all x P A. By (3.3) this implies (1)
and is implied by (1) if char k ‰ 2. Polarization shows any flexible algebra satisfies (2), and if char k ‰ 2,
then the validity of (2) implies pA, ˝q is flexible (taking y “ x in (2)). By (2) and (3.4), a flexible algebra
has self-adjoint curvature.                                                                                        
Lemma 3.2. If char k ‰ 2, a k-algebra pA, ˝q is flexible if and only if it has self-adjoint curvature and A˝ pxq
is a derivation of the underlying commutative algebra pA, dq for all x P A.
Proof. This is immediate from Lemma 3.1 and (3.2).                                                                       
Example 3.5. By [2, Proposition 1], the right-hand side of (3.4) vanishes for any three elements in the
subspace of a structurable algebra fixed by its involution.                                          Ÿ
   The analogue of the algebraic Bianchi identity for a curvature tensor is the vanishing of the complete
antisymmetrization of rpx, yqz. This need not occur in general for, as is the case for an affine connection,
there is an obstruction related to compatibility with an underlying Lie bracket.
   An algebra pA, ˝q is Lie-admissible if the underlying bracket r ¨ , ¨ s satisfies the Jacobi identity, so that
pA, r ¨ , ¨ sq is a Lie algebra. That pA, ˝q be Lie-admissible is equivalent to the vanishing of the completely
antisymmetric tensor
             tpx1 , x2 , x3 q “ pA˝ prx1 , x2 sq ´ rA˝ px1 q, A˝ px2 qsq x3 “ Cycle1,2,3 rrx1 , x2 s, x3 s
(3.5)
                                 ÿ
                              “      sgnpσqrx
                                            σp1q    ,x
                                                   σp2q    ,x
                                                          σp3q     s “ ´Cycle
                                                                         1,2,3     rpx , x qx “ ´Cycle
                                                                                   1   2   3         1,2,3 r̄px , x qx .
                                                                                                             1   2   3
                           σPS3
                              SECTIONAL NONASSOCIATIVITY OF METRIZED ALGEBRAS                                              7


(The notation Cycle1,2,3 indicates the sum over the cyclic permutations of the indicated indices.) The validity
of the identity ´Cycle1,2,3 rpx1 , x2 qx3 “ Cycle prx1 , x2 , x3 s ´ rx2 , x1 , x3 sq “ Cyclerrx1 , x2 s, x3 s in any algebra
is noted in [48, Equation 2.19]. That the vanishing of the first expression on the second line of (3.5) is
equivalent to Lie admissibility is stated in [40, Example 6].
   Note that t̄ “ t. The final two equalities of (3.5) show that the identity t “ 0 is analogous to the algebraic
Bianchi identity for a torsion-free connection, so the tensor t should be regarded as the algebraic analogue
of the torsion of an affine connection.
   A straightforward computation shows t is the self-adjoint part of
(3.6)                                         rA˝ pxq, L˝ pyqs ´ L˝ pA˝ pxqyq
which vanishes for all x, y P A if and only if A˝ pxq is a derivation of pA, ˝q for all x P A.
Example 3.6. It is immediate from (3.5) that t “ 0 for an antiflexible algebra, so an antiflexible algebra is
Lie-admissible.                                                                                            Ÿ
   The analogue of the covariant derivative of the curvature tensor, p∇X RqpY, Zq, is rL˝ pxq, rpy, zqs ´
rpL˝ pxqy, zq ´ rpy, L˝ pxqzq. The identities (3.7) are analogous to the differential Bianchi identity, and re-
inforce the idea that t should be viewed as something like the torsion of ˝.
Lemma 3.3. In any algebra pA, ˝q, for all x, y, z P A there hold
                     Cyclex,y,z prL˝ pxq, rpy, zqs ´ rpL˝ pxqy, zq ´ rpy, L˝ pxqzqq “ L˝ ptpx, y, zqq,
(3.7)
                     Cyclex,y,z prR˝ pxq,r̄py, zqs ´ r̄pR˝ pxqy, zq ´ r̄py, R˝ pxqzqq “ R˝ ptpx, y, zqq.
Proof. A computation using (3.1), the Jacobi identity in EndpAq, the identity rx ˝ y, zs ´ rx, z ˝ ys “ rx, y, zs ´
rz, y, xs, and (3.5) shows the first identity of (3.7). Taking ˝t in place of ˝ and recalling t̄ “ t yields the
second identity of (3.7).                                                                                         

   An algebra pA, ˝q is associator-cyclic if it satisfies the identity
(3.8)             0 “ rx, y, zs ` rz, x, ys ` ry, z, xs “ pA˝ px ˝ yq ´ A˝ pxqL˝ pyq ´ A˝ pyqR˝ pxqq z,
for all x, y, z P A. (There seems to be no standard terminology for algebras satisfying (3.8), and associator-
cyclic seems reasonably evocative terminology.)
Example 3.7. Commutative algebras and Lie algebras are associator-cyclic, but a general anticommutative
algebra need not be associator-cyclic.                                                               Ÿ
Lemma 3.4. If char k ‰ 3, an associator-cyclic k-algebra has self-adjoint curvature if and only if it is
flexible.
Proof. By Lemma 3.1, a flexible algebra has self-adjoint curvature, so it suffices to prove that an associator-
cyclic algebra with self-adjoint curvature is flexible. Taking x “ z in (3.8) and (3.4) yields rx, y, xs “
´rx, x, ys ´ ry, x, xs “ ´2rx, y, xs, so that 3rx, y, xs “ 0 for all x, y P A. If char k ‰ 3, this implies pA, ˝q is
flexible.                                                                                                         

   Antisymmetrizing (3.8) in x and y shows that an associator-cyclic algebra is Lie-admissible. Lemma 3.5
shows that these conditions are equivalent for flexible k-algebras when char k ‰ 2. That when char k ‰ 2 an
algebra is flexible and Lie-admissible if and only if there holds (2) of Lemma 3.5 is due to Okubo and Myung
in [44, p. 80] and [50, Theorem 4.1].
Lemma 3.5 ([44, p. 80], [50, Theorem 4.1], [45]). For a k-algebra pA, ˝q the following are equivalent.
   (1) pA, ˝q is flexible and associator-cyclic.
   (2) For all x P A, A˝ pxq “ L˝ pxq ´ R˝ pxq is a derivation of pA, ˝q.
   (3) pA, ˝q has self-adjoint curvature.
These imply
   (4) pA, ˝q is flexible and Lie-admissible.
8                                                  DANIEL J. F. FOX


If char k ‰ 2, then (4) implies (1) and (2). In particular, if char k ‰ 2, a flexible algebra is Lie-admissible if
and only if it is associator-cyclic.
Proof. For any algebra there holds
(3.9)                Cyclex,y,z rx, y, zs “ prA˝ pxq, L˝ pyqs ´ L˝ pA˝ pxqyqq z ` rL˝ pxq, R˝ pzqsy.
It is immediate from (3.9) that if pA, ˝q is flexible and associator-cyclic, then it satisfies (2). If pA, ˝q satisfies
(2), then ´rR˝ pxq, L˝ pxqs “ rA˝ pxq, L˝ pxqs “ L˝ pA˝ pxqxq “ 0 for all x P A, so pA, ˝q is flexible, and with
(3.9) it follows that pA, ˝q is associator-cyclic. This proves the equivalence of (1) and (2). The equivalence
of (2) and (3) is immediate from (3.6) and its adjoint relation.
    By (3.5), tpx, y, zq “ Cyclex,y,z rx, y, zs ´ Cyclex,y,z ry, x, zs (alternatively, by antisymmetrizing (3.8) in x
and y), so an associator-cyclic algebra is Lie-admissible, and (1) implies (4). If pA, ˝q is Lie-admissible and
flexible, then 0 “ Cyclex,y,z prx, y, zs ´ ry, x, zsq “ 2Cyclex,y,z prx, y, zsq, so, if char k ‰ 2, pA, ˝q is associator-
cyclic.                                                                                                                
Remark 3.8. The essential content of Lemma 3.5 is due to Okubo and Myung [44, 45, 50]. It is formulated
here in a manner consistent with the perspective taken here. The equivalence of (1) and (2) and that these
imply (3) is also proved, with different terminology, in [27] (see also [54, Propositions 1 and 2]). (In [54] an
algebra is called admissible Poisson if there holds (2) and weakly associative if there vanishes the right-hand
side of (3.9) (so it satisfies (3) of Lemma 3.5).)                                                             Ÿ
Example 3.9. By the Jacobi identity, the associator of a Lie algebra pg, r ¨ , ¨ sq is rx, y, zs “ ry, rx, zss and a
Lie algebra is associator-cyclic. This shows an associator-cyclic, flexible algebra need not be commutative. Ÿ
Example 3.10. By [57] an algebra obtained from a flexible algebra by the Cayley-Dickson process is flexible.
An example of a flexible algebra that is not Lie-admissible (so not associator-cyclic) is the imaginary octonions
im O equipped with the commutator bracket rx, ys “ xy ´ yx. (Although im O is Malcev-admissible [45].) Ÿ

                                         4. Sectional nonassociativity
   This section introduces quantitative notions of nonassociativity for metrized algebras. The sectional
nonassociativity was introduced in [18] for metrized commutative algebras.
   In the first part of this section the base field k has characteristic not equal to 2 or 3. Let A be an
n-dimensional k-vector space with a metric h. Define
                    #                                                                                         +
          2 2 ˚
                     a P b 4 A˚ :
        S Λ A “                                                                                                 ,
(4.1)                  apx, y, z, wq “ ´apy, x, z, wq “ ´apx, y, w, zq “ apz, w, x, yq for all x, y, z, w P A
          MCpAq “ ta P S 2 Λ2 A˚ : apx, y, z, wq ` apy, z, x, wq ` apz, x, y, wq “ 0 for all x, y, z, w P Au.
The subspace MCpAq comprises tensors of metric curvature tensor type. An element a P S 2 Λ2 A˚ can be
viewed as the bilinear form on Λ2 A defined on decomposable elements by apx ^ y, z ^ wq “ 4apx, y, z, wq,
so determines an associated quadratic form on Λ2 A. Endow b4 A˚ and its subspaces with the metrics
given by complete contraction with the metric h. If char k ‰ 3, S 2 Λ2 A˚ is isomorphic to the orthogonal
direct sum MCpAq ‘ Λ4 A˚ , and the orthogonal projections onto the factors, P : S 2 Λ2 A˚ Ñ MCpAq and
Q : S 2 Λ2 A˚ Ñ Λ4 A˚ are defined for a P S 2 Λ2 A˚ by
                        Ppaqpx, y, z, wq “ 13 p2apx, y, z, wq ´ apy, z, x, wq ´ apz, x, y, wqq ,
(4.2)
                        Qpaqpx, y, z, wq “ 13 papx, y, z, wq ` apy, z, x, wq ` apz, x, y, wqq .
The tensors a and Ppaq do not necessarily determine the same quadratic form on Λ2 A, but the quadratic
forms they determine agree on decomposable elements of Λ2 A.
Lemma 4.1. Suppose char k ﬄ 6. Let h be a metric on the k-vector space A and let P : S 2 Λ2 A˚ Ñ MCpAq
be the orthogonal projection with respect to the inner products given by complete contraction with h. The
quadratic forms determined on Λ2 A by a, b P S 2 Λ2 A˚ coincide on decomposable elements of Λ2 A if and only
if Ppaq “ Ppbq.
                                  SECTIONAL NONASSOCIATIVITY OF METRIZED ALGEBRAS                                                 9


Proof. For ω P Λ2 A and a P S 2 Λ2 A˚ ,
(4.3)              xa, ω b ωy “ xPpaq, ω b ωy ` xQpaq, ω b ωy “ xPpaq, ω b ωy ` 61 xQpaq, ω ^ ωy,
in which x ¨ , ¨ y denotes the pairing between dual vector spaces. Because ω ^ ω “ 0 if ω is decomposable,
this shows that the restrictions to decomposable 2-forms of the quadratic forms determined by a and Ppaq
coincide, and, moreover, that if Qpaq “ 0, then these quadratic forms are equal.
   On the other hand, that the quadratic forms determined on Λ2 A by a, b P S 2 Λ2 A˚ coincide on decomposable
elements means that c “ a ´ b P S 2 Λ2 A˚ satisfies 4cpx, y, x, yq “ xc, px ^ yq b px ^ yqy “ 0 for all x, y P A.
Linearizing in x and y and using the symmetries of c yields
(4.4)        0 “ cpx, y, z, wq ` cpz, y, x, wq ` cpx, w, z, yq ` cpz, w, x, yq “ 2cpx, y, z, wq ´ 2cpy, z, x, wq
for all x, y, z, w P A. Hence cpx, y, z, wq “ cpy, z, x, wq “ cpz, x, y, wq, and in (4.2) this yields Ppaq ´ Ppbq “
Ppcq “ 0.                                                                                                         
   For a metrized algebra pA, ˝, hq, it follows straightforwardly from the invariance of h that
(4.5)        hprx, y, zs, wq “ ´hpry, z, ws, xq “ hprz, w, xs, yq “ ´hprw, x, ys, zq,                   for all x, y, z, w P A.
Define r5 px, y, z, wq “ hprpx, yqz, wq and r̄5 px, y, z, wq “ hpr̄px, yqz, wq. From (4.5) and (3.1) it follows that
(4.6)                    r5 px, y, z, wq “ ´r̄5 px, y, w, zq,                         for all x, y, z, w P A.
By (4.6) and (4.5),
                               r5 px, y, z, wq ` r̄5 px, y, z, wq “ r5 px, y, z, wq ´ r5 px, y, w, zq
(4.7)
                                “ r5 pz, w, x, yq ´ r5 pz, w, y, xq “ r5 pz, w, x, yq ` r̄5 pz, w, x, yq
so that r5 ` r̄5 is an element of S 2 Λ2 A˚ (as it need not satisfy the algebraic Bianchi identity, it need not be
in MCpAq). This follows also from the alternative expression
         r5 px, y, z, wq ` r̄5 px, y, z, wq
(4.8)
                         “ ´hprx, ys, rz, wsq ` hpy ˝ z, w ˝ xq ´ hpx ˝ z, w ˝ yq ` hpz ˝ y, x ˝ wq ´ hpz ˝ x, y ˝ wq,
which is evidently antisymmetric in x and y, and in z and w, and symmetric in the pairs xy and zw.
Lemma 4.2. Suppose char k ﬄ 6. A metrized k-algebra pA, ˝, hq is Lie-admissible if and only if r5 ` r̄5 P
MCpAq.
Proof. By (3.7), the tensor m defined by m5 “ 3Ppr5 ` r̄5 q P MCpAq satisfies
                     mpx, yqz “ ´2prpx, yqz ` r̄px, yqzq ` rpy, zqx ` r̄py, zqx ` rpz, xqy ` r̄pz, xqyq
(4.9)
                                 “ ´3prpx, yqz ` r̄px, yqzq ´ 2tpx, y, zq,
for all x, y, z P A. The claim follows because pA, ˝q is Lie-admissible if and only if t vanishes identically.                    
   Let pA, ˝, hq be a metrized algebra of dimension at least 2. If x, y P A span a two-dimensional subspace
V Ă A and x̄ “ ax ` by and ȳ “ cx ` dy span the same subspace V, then
                 hpx̄, x̄qhpȳ, ȳq ´ hpx̄, ȳq2 “ pad ´ bcq2 hpx, xqhpy, yq ´ hpx, yq2 ,
                                                             `                         ˘
(4.10)
(4.11)              hpx̄ ˝ x̄, ȳ ˝ ȳq ´ hpx̄ ˝ ȳ, x̄ ˝ ȳq “ pad ´ bcq2 phpx ˝ x, y ˝ yq ´ hpx ˝ y, y ˝ xqq ,
from which it follows that (4.11) divided by (4.10) is well-defined and depends only the subspace V, provided
the denominator is non-zero, which is the case as long V is h-nondegenerate. (A symmetric bilinear form h
on a two-dimensional k-vector space V is nondegenerate if and only if hpx, xqhpy, yq ´ hpx, yq2 ‰ 0 for any
basis tx, yu of V; this is a special case of the statement that a symmetric bilinear form is nondegenerate if
and only if the determinant of its Gram matrix with respect to any basis is nonvanishing [36, Proposition
I.1.2].) These observations show that Definition 4.1 is well made. By (4.5),
(4.12)                    hprx, x, ys, yq “ ´hpry, x, xs, yq,                             for all x, y P A.
The second equality in (4.13) is (4.12).
10                                                   DANIEL J. F. FOX


Definition 4.1. Let pA, ˝, hq be a metrized k-algebra of dimension at least 2. Define the sectional nonasso-
ciativity Kpx, yq of the h-nondegenerate subspace Spantx, yu Ă A to be
                                      hprpx, yqx, yq ` hpr̄px, yqx, yq
         Kpx, yq “ K˝,h px, yq “ ´ 12
                                         hpx ˝ x, y ˝ yq ´ hpx, yq2
(4.13)
                         hprx, x, ys, yq                ´hpry, x, xs, yq       hpx ˝ x, y ˝ yq ´ hpx ˝ y, y ˝ xq
                 “                           2
                                               “                           2
                                                                             “                                   .
                   hpx, xqhpy, yq ´ hpx, yq        hpx, xqhpy, yq ´ hpx, yq       hpx, xqhpy, yq ´ hpx, yq2
   The proviso that Spantx, yu be h-nondegenerate is automatic when h is anisotropic.
   By definition, the sectional nonassociativity is invariant under isometric algebra isomorphisms of metrized
algebras.
   The dependence of K “ K˝,h on ˝ and h is indicated with subscripts when helpful. For r, s P R,    9 Ks˝,rh “
 2 ´1
s r K˝,h , where s˝ means the multiplication sx ˝ y.
   Given an algebra pA, ˝q, with underlying anticommutative and commutative products r ¨ , ¨ s and d, a
straightforward computation shows that that h is invariant with respect to both of r ¨ , ¨ s and d, consequently
the sectional nonassociativities Kr ¨ , ¨ s,h px, yq and Kd,h px, yq are defined. From the identity
                    rx, y, zsd ` rx, y, zsr ¨ , ¨ s “ rx, y, zsd ` rrx, ys, zs ` rry, zs, xs
(4.14)
                               “ rx, y, zsd ´ rrz, xs, ys ` t˝ px, y, zq “ 2rx, y, zs˝ ´ 2rz, y, xs˝,
(subscripts indicate the dependence on the different multiplications) together with (4.12) there follows
(4.15)                        hprx, x, ysd , yq ` hprx, x, ysr ¨ , ¨ s , yq “ 4hprx, x, ys˝ , yq,
and with (4.13) this yields
                 4K˝,h px, yq “ Kd,h px, yq ` Kr ¨ , ¨ s,h px, yq
(4.16)                             hpx d x, y d yq ´ hpx d y, y d xq        hprx, ys, rx, ysq
                               “                                     `                           .
                                       hpx, xqhpy, yq ´ hpx, yq2       hpx, xqhpy, yq ´ hpx, yq2
It follows that for a Euclidean metrized algebra, 4K˝,h px, yq ě Kd,h px, yq for all linearly independent x and
y, with equality if and only if x and y commute.
   For h P S 2 A˚ , define h ? h P MCpAq by
(4.17)       ph ? hqpx, y, z, wq “ hpx, zqhpy, wq ´ hpx, wqhpy, zq,                        for all x, y, z, w P A.
                                         2    2            2
By definition ph ? hqpx, y, x, yq “ |x| |y| ´ hpx, yq .
Lemma 4.3. Let k be an infinite field. A metrized k-algebra pA, ˝, hq of dimension n ě 2 has constant
sectional nonassociativity c P k if and only if the quadratic forms determined on Λ2 A by ´ 21 pr5 ` r̄5 q and
cph ? hq coincide on decomposable elements of Λ2 A.
Proof. That the coincidence of ´ 21 pr5 ` r̄5 q and cph ? hq on decomposable elements of Λ2 A implies constant
sectional nonassociativity is immediate from the definition (4.13).
   The Grassmannian Grp2, Aq of two-dimensional subspaces of A is a projective variety via the Plücker
embedding Grp2, Aq Ñ PpΛ2 Aq sending ktx, yu P Grp2, Aq to the span ktx ^ yu. The homogeneous functions
H, K : Λ2 A Ñ k defined by Hpx ^ yq “ hpx, xqhpy, yq ´ hpx, yq2 and Kpx ^ yq “ ´ 12 pr5 ` r̄5 qpx, y, x, yq “
hpx ˝ x, y ˝ yq ´ hpx ˝ y, y ˝ xq are quadratic polynomials that restrict to the image of the Plücker embedding
of the Grassmannian Grp2, Aq of two-dimensional subspaces of A. If k is infinite, then the intersection of
any two nonempty Zariski open subsets of Grp2, Aq is nonempty. That the sectional nonassociativity be
constant equal to c is the same as assuming cH ´ K vanishes on Grp2, AqztH “ 0u. As the complement
Grp2, AqztH “ 0u is infinite, if cH ´ K vanishes on Grp2, AqztH “ 0u, it vanishes on Grp2, Aq.               
Lemma 4.4. Let pA, ˝, hq be a metrized algebra over an infinite field of characteristic not equal to 2 or 3.
  (1) pA, ˝, hq has constant sectional nonassociativity c if and only if Ppr5 ` r̄5 q “ 2ch ? h.
  (2) If pA, ˝, hq is Lie-admissible, it has constant sectional nonassociativity c if and only if r5 `r̄5 “ 2ch?h.
  (3) If pA, ˝, hq is Lie-admissible and flexible, it has constant sectional nonassociativity c if and only if
      r “ r̄ “ ch ? h.
                              SECTIONAL NONASSOCIATIVITY OF METRIZED ALGEBRAS                                              11


Proof. By definition of Kpx, yq and Lemma 4.1,
(4.18)           ph ? hqpx, y, x, yqKpx, yq “ ´ 21 pr5 ` r̄5 qpx, y, x, yq “ ´ 21 Ppr5 ` r̄5 qpx, y, x, yq.
If there holds (1), then the last term of (4.18) equals cph ? hqpx, y, x, yq, so (4.18) shows Kpx, yq “ c. On the
other hand, by Lemma 4.3, that Kpx, yq “ c for all linearly independent x, y P A˚ means that the quadratic
forms determined on Λ2 A by ´ 21 pr5 `r̄5 q and cph ? hq coincide on decomposable elements of Λ2 A. By Lemma
4.1 this implies (1). If ˝ is Lie-admissible, then, by Lemma 4.2, Ppr5 ` r̄5 q “ r5 ` r̄5 , so in this case (1) is
equivalent to (2). If ˝ is moreover flexible, then r “ r̄, so (2) is equivalent to (3).                         

Example 4.1. Evidently the sectional nonassociativity of a metrized associative algebra is identically zero.
More generally, the same is true for an alternative algebra. An algebra pA, ˝q is alternative if rx, x, ys “ 0
and rx, y, ys “ 0 for all x, y P A. By (4.13), the sectional nonassociativity of a metrized alternative algebra
is identically zero. This can also be seen as a consequence of the theorem of E. Artin (see [58, p. 18]) that
shows that the subalgebra generated by any two elements of an alternative algebra is associative.
    For example, any Hurwitz algebra is alternative, so has vanishing sectional nonassociativity.
    This observation illustrates the limitations of the analogy between the associator and the curvature tensor,
for the octonions are alternative but not associative.                                                       Ÿ
    In the rest of this section it is supposed the base field is R.
    A Euclidean metrized algebra pA, ˝, hq has positive, nonnegative, zero, etc. sectional nonassociativity if
the given qualifier is valid for every two-dimensional subspace of A.
    For a Euclidean metrized algebra, by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, the numbers
(4.19)         UpA, ˝, hq “       sup       Kh px, yq,                   LpA, ˝, hq “         inf      Kh px, yq,
                              x,yPA:x^y‰0                                                x,yPA:x^y‰0

are finite and invariant under isometric automorphisms of pA, ˝, hq. Their estimation for any well delineated
class of metrized algebras is a basic problem.
   Such an estimate is most interesting when the invariant metric h is determined in some canonical manner
by the algebra structure, as is the case for the Killing form τ˝ px, yq “ tr L˝ pxqL˝ pyq of a Lie or Malcev
algebra or the form tr L˝ px ˝ yq on a Jordan algebra.
   Lemma 4.5 shows that taking direct sums of Euclidean metrized commutative algebras preserves conditions
such as nonpositive and nonnegative sectional nonassociativity.
   For readability, in the proofs of Lemmas 4.5 and 4.6, there are written |x|2 “ hpx, xq, xx, yy “ hpx, yq.
Lemma 4.5. Let pA, ˝, hq be a Euclidean metrized commutative algebra and suppose that A “ A1 ‘ A2 is a
decomposition into h-orthogonal ideals. There hold:
(4.20)    LpA, ˝, hq ě mintLpA1 , ˝, hq, LpA2 , ˝, hq, 0u,              UpA, ˝, hq ď maxtUpA1 , ˝, hq, UpA2 , ˝, hq, 0u.
In particular, if pA1 , ˝, hq and pA2 , ˝, hq have nonpositive (resp. nonnegative) sectional nonassociativity, then
pA, ˝, hq has nonpositive (resp. nonnegative) sectional nonassociativity.
Proof. For any x1 , y1 P A2 and x2 , y2 P A2 , by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality,
                |x ^ y|2 ´ |x1 ^ y1 |2 ´ |x2 ^ y2 |2 “ |x1 |2 |y2 |2 ` |x2 |2 |y1 |2 ´ 2xx1 , y1 yxx2 , y2 y “
(4.21)
                         “ p|x1 ||y2 | ´ |x2 ||y1 |q2 ` 2 p|x1 ||y1 ||x2 ||y2 | ´ xx1 , y1 yxx2 , y2 yq ě 0,
with equality if and only if x “ x1 `x2 and y “ y1 `y2 are linearly dependent. Let xi P Ai be the h-orthogonal
                                                 2
projection of x P A. By (4.21), ri “ |x|x^y|
                                         i ^yi |
                                              2    is contained in r0, 1s, and, by the orthogonality of the ideals A1
and A2 , it follows that for linearly independent x, y P A,
(4.22)         m1 r1 ` m2 r2 ď KA,h px, yq “ KA1 ,h px1 , y1 qr1 ` KA2 ,h px2 , y2 qr2 ď M1 r1 ` M2 r2 .

Applying to (4.22) the inequalities minta, b, cu ď ar1 ` br2 ` cp1 ´ r1 ´ r2 q ď maxta, b, cu, valid for any
r1 , r2 P r0, 1s, with pa, b, cq “ pm1 , m2 , 0q or pa, b, cq “ pM1 , M2 , 0q yields (4.20).              
12                                                          DANIEL J. F. FOX


   It is more difficult to relate the sectional nonassociativity of a tensor product to the sectional nonassocia-
tivities of its factors, but in some cases something can be said.
   The tensor product of metrized algebras pAi , ˝i , hi q, i P t1, 2u, is the vector space A1 b A2 with the product
defined by pa1 b b1 q ˝ pa2 b b2 q “ pa1 ˝1 b1 q b pa1 ˝2 b2 q and extending bilinearly, and the metric defined by
hpa1 b b1 , a2 b b2 q “ h1 pa1 , b1 qh2 pa1 , b2 q and extending bilinearly.
Lemma 4.6. For i P t1, 2u let pAi , ˝i , hi q be Euclidean metrized commutative algebras. For ai , āi P Ai , if
KA1 ,h1 pa1 , ā1 q and KA2 ,h2 pa2 , ā2 q are both nonnegative, then KA1 bA2 ,h1 bh2 pa1 b a2 , ā1 b ā2 q is nonnegative.
Proof. Straightforward computations show
                   |pa1 b a2 q ^ pā1 b ā2 q|2 “ |a1 ^ ā1 |2 |a2 ^ ā2 |2 ` |a2 ^ ā2 |2 xa1 , ā1 y2 ` |a1 ^ ā1 |2 xa2 , ā2 y2 ,
                                                                         2
(4.23)    KA1 bA2 ,h1 bh2 pa1 b a2 , ā1 b ā2 q |pa|a11ba2 q^pā1 bā2 q|
                                                        ^ā1 |2 |a2 ^ā2 |2 “ KA1 ,h1 pa1 , ā1 qKA2 ,h2 pa2 , ā2 q
                                                                2                                 2
                                                    ` |a1 ˝1 ā1 |                      |a2 ˝2 ā2 |
                                                      |a1 ^ā1 |2 KA2 ,h2 pa2 , ā2 q ` |a2 ^ā2 |2 KA1 ,h1 pa1 , ā1 q,
from which the claim follows.                                                                                                           

                 5. Examples of algebras with constant sectional nonassociativity
   This section presents examples of metrized algebras having constant sectional nonassociativity.
Example 5.1. By Example 3.4 a 2-step nilpotent Lie algebra satisfies r “ r̄ “ 0. If such a Lie algebra
is equipped with an invariant metric, then its sectional nonassociativity vanishes identically. In general a
2-step nilpotent Lie algebra need not admit an invariant metric. For example, the Heisenberg Lie algebra
of any odd dimension admits no invariant metric. However, there are 2-step nilpotent Lie algebras that do
admit invariant metrics. G. Ovando [52] has given some examples. For example the semidirect product of a
Lie algebra with its dual carries a split signature invariant metric, and if the original Lie algebra is 2-step
nilpotent, its semidirect product with its dual is 2-step nilpotent as well.
   However, these examples obtained from 2-step nilpotent real Lie algebras cannot be Euclidean - the
invariance of the metric and the 2-step nilpotence of g imply that rg, gs is a nontrivial isotropic subspace. Ÿ
Example 5.2. By Example 3.2 an antiflexible algebra has anti-self-adjoint-curvature, so a metrized antiflexi-
ble algebra has vanishing sectional nonassociativity. The following example of a three-dimensional antiflexible
algebra that is not power-associative is a modification (by unimportant scalar factors) of one given by F.
Kosier in [34, p. 303]. Suppose char k ‰ 2 and equip k3 with the product x ˝ y “ p2x1 y1 ` x2 y3 , 2x1 y2 , 2x3 y1 q
where x “ px1 , x2 , x3 q and y “ py1 , y2 , y3 q. The two possible third powers of p0, 1, 1q are different, so the
algebra is not power-associative.
   On pk3 , ˝q, the metric h defined by hpx, yq “ x1 y1 ` 12 px2 y3 ` x3 y2 q is invariant, for hpx ˝ y, zq “ 2x1 y1 z1 `
x2 y3 z1 ` x1 y2 z3 ` x3 y1 z2 is preserved by cyclic permutations of x, y, and z. A computation shows rx, y, zs “
p0, 2x2 y3 z2 , ´2x3 y2 z3 q, which is evidently symmetric in x and z. It follows that hprx, x, ys, yq “ 0, and
pA, ˝, hq has vanishing sectional nonassociativity.
   By Example 3.6, pA, ˝q is Lie admissible as can also be checked using that its underlying bracket is
rx, ys “ px2 y3 ´ x3 y2 , 2px1 y2 ´ x2 y1 q, 2px3 y1 ´ x1 y3 qq. The underlying Lie algebra has Killing form equal to
8h and is isomorphic to slp2, kq for the elements p “ p1, 0, 0q, q “ p0, 1, 0q, and r “ p0, 0, 1q are an slp2q-triple
satisfying rp, qs “ r, rr, ps “ 2p, and rr, qs “ ´2q.
   This example can be modified to yield a Euclidean example by taking sop3, kq in place of slp2, kq. Define
a product ‹ on k3 by x ‹ y “ px2 y3 , x3 y1 , x1 y2 q. The underlying anticommutative bracket is the usual vector
cross product x ˆ y “ px2 y3 ´ x3 y2 , x3 y1 ´ x1 y3 , x1 y2 ´ x2 y1 q on k3 , while the underlying commutative
product is its symmetric analogue x d y “ px2 y3 ` x3 y2 , x3 y1 ` x1 y3 , x1 y2 ` x2 y1 q (which is isomorphic
to the 3-dimensional case of the algebra of Example 5.5). That the products ‹, ˆ, and d are invariant
with respect to the metric gpx, yq “ x1 y1 ` x2 y2 ` x3 y3 follows from the cyclic symmetry of gpx ‹ y, zq “
x1 y2 z3 ` x2 y3 z1 ` x3 y1 z2 in x, y, and z. The associators satisfy
                             rx, y, zs‹ “ ppx3 z3 ´ x2 z2 qy1 , px1 z1 ´ x3 z3 qy2 , px2 z2 ´ x1 z1 qy3 q,
(5.1)
                            rx, y, zsˆ “ px ˆ zq ˆ y “ ´rx, y, zsd,
                            SECTIONAL NONASSOCIATIVITY OF METRIZED ALGEBRAS                                     13


from which it is apparent that ‹ is antiflexible and it follows that gprx, x, ys‹ , yq “ 0, so that the Euclidean
metrized algebra pk3 , ‹, gq has vanishing sectional nonassociativity, and ´gprx, x, ysd , yq “ gprx, x, ysˆ , yq “
gpx, xqgpy, yq ´ gpx, yq2 so that the Euclidean metrized algebras pk3 , d, gq and pk3 , ˆ, gq have constant sec-
tional nonassociativities ´1 and 1, respectively. The last statement is particular cases of Examples 5.3 and
5.5.                                                                                                              Ÿ
Example 5.3. A metrized algebra pA, ˝, hq is a (twofold) cross product algebra if it satisfies:
     (1) The multiplication ˝ is antisymmetric.
     (2) The quantity hpx ˝ y, x ˝ yq equals the Gram determinant hpx, xqhpy, yq ´ hpx, yq2 .
It follows from (1) and the invariance of h that the product x ˝ y is h-orthogonal to x and y, hpx ˝ y, xq “ 0.
In [13] and [9] it is shown that a real cross product algebra exists only in dimensions 3 and 7, in which case
it is determined uniquely up to isomorphism by the signature of h, the only possibilities being the positive
definite case, and the case with negative inertial index one greater than the positive inertial index.
Theorem 5.4. Let k be an infinite field such that char k ‰ 2. A metrized algebra pA, ˝, hq with antisymmetric
multiplication is a cross product algebra if and only if it has constant sectional nonassociativity 1.
Proof. The antisymmetry of ˝ means that (4.13) takes the form (1.2) It follows that a cross product algebra
has constant sectional nonassociativity 1. On the other hand, if a metrized algebra pA, ˝, hq with antisym-
metric multiplication has constant sectional nonassociativity 1 then hpx ˝ y, x ˝ yq “ hpx, xqhpy, yq ´ hpx, yq2
whenever x and y span an h-nondegenerate subspace. Because k is infinite, arguing as in the proof of Lemma
4.3, this holds if and only if hpx ˝ y, x ˝ yq “ hpx, xqhpy, yq ´ hpx, yq2 for all x and y, so that pA, ˝, hq is a
cross product algebra.                                                                                          
Corollary 5.1. Suppose char k ‰ 2. A metrized algebra pA, ˝, hq with anisotropic h satisfies hpx ˝ y, x ˝ yq “
hpx, xqhpy, yq ´ hpx, yq2 for all x, y P A if and only if pA, ˝, hq is a cross product algebra.
Proof. To show the forward direction it suffices to show ˝ is antisymmetric. If hpx˝y, x˝yq “ hpx, xqhpy, yq´
hpx, yq2 for all x, y P A, then hpx ˝ x, x ˝ xq “ 0 for all x P A. Because h is anisotropic, this implies x ˝ x “ 0
for all x P A. Because char k ‰ 2, this implies ˝ is antisymmetric. The reverse implication is immediate. 
   Hence a cross product algebra can be defined as a metrized algebra with antisymmetric multiplication
and having sectional nonassociativity 1 on every h-nondegenerate subspace. Moreover, it is not necessary to
suppose antisymmetry if the metric is anisotropic and char k ‰ 2.                                         Ÿ
Example 5.5. An example of a commutative algebra having constant negativeřn       sectional nonassociativity
                            n                                                                      n
is the following.
         řn       Consider R   with  the coordinatewise product x ¨ y  “  i“1 xi y i . Define ℓ : R Ñ R by
                                                        n`1          1
ℓpxq “ i“1 and define a modified product x ˝ y “ n´1 x ¨ y ´ n´1 pℓpxqy ` ℓpyqxq. Then pRn , ˝q is a
commutative algebra metrized by its Killing form
                                                           n`1             1
(5.2)                        τ˝ px, yq “ tr L˝ pxqL˝ pyq “ n´1 ℓpx ¨ yq ´ n´1 ℓpxqℓpyq,
which is positive definite. With this metric, this algebra satisfies the reverse Norton inequality; in fact it has
constant negative sectional nonassociativity. See [18] for details.                                             Ÿ
Example 5.6. This example describes a one-parameter family of pairwise nonisomorphic 3-dimensional
Euclidean metrized commutative algebras having constant sectional nonassociativity.
   For ǫ P r0, 8q, define a commutative algebra pUǫ , ˝q as the 3-dimensional R-vector space Uǫ with basis
tf0 , f1 , f2 u and multiplication ˝ given by
                       f0 ˝ f0 “ f0 ,         f0 ˝ f1 “ p 12 ´ ǫqf1 , f0 ˝ f2 “ p 21 ` ǫqf2 ,
(5.3)
                       f1 ˝ f1 “ p 12 ´ ǫqf0 , f1 ˝ f2 “ 0,           f2 ˝ f2 “ p 21 ` ǫqf0 .
For x “ x0 f0 ` x1 f1 ` x2 f2 the matrix of L˝ pxq with respect to the ordered basis tf0 , f1 , f2 u is
                                                   p 12 ´ ǫqx1 p 12 ` ǫqx2
                                    ¨                                      ˛
                                          x0
(5.4)                               ˝p 1 ´ ǫqx1 p 1 ´ ǫqx0           0     ‚,
                                        2             2
                                        1                         1
                                      p 2 ` ǫqx2         0     p 2 ` ǫqx0
14                                                       DANIEL J. F. FOX


A calculation using
(5.5)    x ˝ y “px0 y0 ` p 12 ´ ǫqx1 y1 ` p 21 ` ǫqx2 y2 qf0 ` p 12 ´ ǫqpx0 y1 ` x1 y0 qf1 ` p 21 ` ǫqpx0 y2 ` x2 y0 qf2 ,
shows that the metric hpx, yq “ x0 y0 ` x1 y1 ` x2 y2 satisfies
(5.6)      hpx ˝ y, zq “ x0 y0 z0 ` p 21 ´ ǫqpx1 y1 z0 ` x1 y0 z1 ` x0 y1 z1 q ` p 21 ` ǫqpx2 y2 z0 ` x2 y0 z2 ` x0 y2 z2 q.
Because this is completely symmetric in x, y, and z it shows h is invariant with respect to ˝. From (5.4) and
(5.5) it follows that the matrix of A˝ px, yq “ L˝ px ˝ yq ´ L˝ pxqL˝ pyq is
                      ¨                                          ˛
                       x1 y1 ` x2 y2    ´x0 y1        ´x0 y2
(5.7)     p 41 ´ ǫ2 q ˝ ´x1 y0       x0 y0 ` x2 y2    ´x1 y2 ‚ “ p 14 ´ ǫ2 q phpx, yq IdUǫ ´x b hpy, ¨ qq ,
                          ´x2 y0        ´x2 y1     x0 y0 ` x1 y1
Note that tr A˝ px, yq “ 2p1{4 ´ ǫ2qhpx, yq, so that h is determined by ˝. From (5.7) it follows that Kpx, yq “
1    2
4 ´ ǫ for all linearly independent x and y in Uǫ , so that pUǫ , ˝, hq has constant sectional nonassociativity
1    2
4 ´ǫ .

Lemma 5.1. If ǫ ‰ 1{2, the algebra pUǫ , ˝q is simple.
Proof. By (5.4) and (5.5),
(5.8)                     det L˝ pxq “ x0 px20 ` p 21 ´ ǫqx21 ` p 12 ` ǫqx22 q “ 41 tr L˝ pxq tr L˝ px ˝ xq.
If I Ă Uǫ is a nontrivial ideal so is its h-orthogonal complement IK , so without loss of generality it can be
assumed I is one-dimensional and generated by z P Uǫ . Consequently there is λ P k such that z ˝z “ λz. Since
L˝ pzqUǫ Ă I, L˝ pzq has rank at most 1 and tr L˝ pzq “ λ. By (5.8), 0 “ det L˝ pzq “ pλ{4qptr L˝ pzqq2 “ λz02 .
Were z0 ‰ 0, then λ “ 0 and z ˝ z “ 0. By (5.5), z ˝ z “ 0 if and only if p1 ´ 2ǫqz1 z0 “ 0, p1 ` 2ǫqz2 z0 “ 0,
and z02 ` p1{2 ´ ǫqz12 ` p1{2 ` ǫqz22 “ 0. Because 2ǫ R t˘1u, if z0 ‰ 0, the first two equations imply z1 “ 0
and z2 “ 0, which in the third equation yield the contradiction z02 “ 0.
     Consequently, z0 “ 0 and there are a, b P R such that z “ af1 ` bf2 and λaf1 ` λbf2 “ λz “ z ˝ z “
pp 12 ´ ǫqa2 ` p 21 ` ǫqb2 qf0 . Because 2ǫ R t˘1u, were λ ‰ 0 this would imply a “ 0 “ b, a contradiction. If
λ “ 0 then p 12 ´ ǫqa2 ` p 12 ` ǫqb2 “ 0. If either of a or b is 0 then so is the other. Were ab ‰ 0, then it would
follow from (5.4) that L˝ pzq “ L˝ paf1 ` bf2 q has rank 2, contradicting that L˝ pzq has rank at most 1.        
Lemma 5.2. If ǫ ‰ 1{2, then the nontrivial idempotents and square-zero elements in pUǫ , ˝q have forms
indicated in Table 1.

                Element x                Condition                Type        hpx, xq          Spectrum L˝ pxq

                     f0                     none              Idempotent          1             t1, 12 p1 ˘ 2ǫqu
               1                                                                1´6ǫ
              1´2ǫ pf0 ˘ ωf1 q
                                                4ǫ
                                         ω 2 “ 2ǫ´1           Idempotent       p1´2ǫq3            t1, 12 1`2ǫ
                                                                                                         1´2ǫ u
               1                                                                1`6ǫ
              1`2ǫ pf0 ˘ ωf2 q
                                                4ǫ
                                         ω 2 “ 1`2ǫ           Idempotent       p1`2ǫq3            t1, 12 1´2ǫ
                                                                                                         1`2ǫ u
                      ω                 9 ω 2 “ 4ǫ2 ´ 1                         4ǫθ 2
              θpf1 ˘ 1`2ǫ f2 q      θ P k,                    Square-zero       1`2ǫ       t0, ˘θσu, σ 2 “ ǫp2ǫ ´ 1q

                    Table 1. Idempotents and square-zero elements of pUǫ , ˝q when 1 ‰ 1{2.


Proof. From (5.5) it follows that x P Uǫ is an idempotent if and only if it solves
(5.9)                                       x0 “ x20 ` 12 p1 ´ 2ǫqx21 ` 12 p1 ` 2ǫqx22 ,
(5.10)                                      x1 “ p1 ´ 2ǫqx0 x1 ,
(5.11)                                      x2 “ p1 ` 2ǫqx0 x2 .
                            SECTIONAL NONASSOCIATIVITY OF METRIZED ALGEBRAS                                         15


Combining (5.10) and (5.11) shows p1 ´ 2ǫqx0 x1 x2 “ x1 x2 “ p1 ` 2ǫqx0 x1 x2 . Because 2ǫ ‰ ˘1 this implies
x0 x1 x2 “ 0. If x0 “ 0, then, by (5.10) and (5.11), there vanish both x1 and x2 , so x “ 0. Suppose x0 ‰ 0.
Then x1 x2 “ 0. By (5.9) it cannot be that both x1 and x2 vanish, so either x2 “ 0 or x1 “ 0. These two
                                                                                        4ǫ             4ǫ
cases yield the idempotents listed in Table 1, provided there exist solutions to ω 2 “ 2ǫ´1 and ω 2 “ 1`2ǫ in
k.
   From (5.5) it follows that x P Uǫ is square-zero if and only if it solves
(5.12)                                 0 “ x20 ` 12 p1 ´ 2ǫqx21 ` 21 p1 ` 2ǫqx22 ,
(5.13)                                 0 “ p1 ´ 2ǫqx0 x1 ,
(5.14)                                 0 “ p1 ` 2ǫqx0 x2 .
Were x0 ‰ 0, then, by (5.13) and (5.14), there would vanish both x1 and x2 , but in (5.12) this yields a
contradiction, so x0 “ 0. Upon substituting x0 “ 0 in (5.12), it follows that the square-zero elements
are as indicated in the last line of Table 1. To see that L˝ pxq is diagonalizable proceed as follows. If
                                                                                                   ´        ¯2
p1 ´ 2ǫqa2 ` p1 ` 2ǫqb2 “ 0 admits a solution with a, b P k, then necessarily ab ‰ 0, and 4ǫ2 ´ 1 “ p1`2ǫqb
                                                                                                       a       ,
                                                           ω                                       ω
so there is ω P k such that 4ǫ2 ´ 1 “ ω 2 and b “ ˘ 1`2ǫ      a. In this case write z˘ “ f1 ˘ 1`2ǫ    f2 . It is
                                                               1                                 1
straightforward to check that z` ˝ z´ “ p1 ´ 2ǫqf0 , z` ˝ f0 “ 2 z` ´ ǫz´ , and z´ ˝ f0 “ ´ǫz` ` 2 z´ . If there
is σ P k such that σ 2 “ ǫp2ǫ ´ 1q, then ˘σf0 ` 12 z` ´ ǫz´ are eigenvectors of L˝ pz` q with eigenvalues ˘σ
and ˘σf0 ´ ǫz` ` 21 z´ are eigenvectors of L˝ pz´ q with eigenvalues ˘σ.                                      
Corollary 5.2. For ǫ, ǭ P r0, 8q, pUǫ , ˝q and pUǭ , ˝q are not isomorphic if ǫ ‰ ǭ.
Proof. The algebra pU1{2 , ˝q is associative, isomorphic to a direct sum of a trivial ideal spanned by f1 and a
two-dimensional ideal spanned by f0 and f2 that is isomorphic to the quadratic algebra Rrts{pt2 ´ 1q. When
ǫ ‰ 1{2, pUǫ , ˝q is not power associative. For example, for x “ f1 ` f2 , ppx ˝ xq ˝ xq ˝ x “ p 12 ` 2ǫ2 qf0 while
ppx ˝ xq ˝ px ˝ xqq “ f0 . Consequently, for ǫ ‰ 1{2, pUǫ , ˝q is not isomorphic to the associative algebra pU1{2 , ˝q.
   An algebra isomorphism maps idempotents to idempotents and preserves the spectra of the corresponding
left multiplication endomorphisms. By Lemma 5.2, the algebra pU0 , ˝q has a unique nontrivial idempotent
and only one one-dimensional subalgebra, while for all ǫ ą 0, pUǫ , ˝q has at least three distinct idempotents,
so, for ǫ ą 0, pUǫ , ˝q is not isomorphic to pU0 , ˝qq.
    Suppose ǫ, ǭ P p0, 1{2q Y p1{2, 8q and φ : Uǫ Ñ Uǭ is an algebra isomorphism. By Lemma 5.2, for
         4ǫ      1
ω 2 “ 1`2ǫ   , 1`2ǫ φpf0 ˘ ωf2 q P IdempUǭ , ˝q whose left multiplication endomorphisms have the same spectrum
                            1´2ǫ                                              1´2ǫ    1´2ǭ
          1´2ǫ
t1, 1{2, 1`2ǫ u. Because 1`2ǫ    ‰ 1, it follows from Lemma 5.2 that either 1`2ǫ   “ 1`2ǭ  or 1´2ǫ    1`2ǭ
                                                                                               1`2ǫ “ 1´2ǭ . Because
         1´2t
f ptq “ 1`2t decreases monotonically on r0, 8q, the first case implies ǭ “ ǫ. The second case implies ǫ ` ǭ “ 0,
which is impossible because ǫ and ǭ are both positive.                                                             
  In summary, pU˘ǫ , ˝, hq is a one-parameter family of pairwise nonisomorphic Euclidean commutative
metrized algebras having strictly positive constant sectional nonassociativity for ǫ P r0, 1{2q and strictly
negative constant sectional nonassociativity for ǫ P p1{2, 8q and which are simple when ǫ ‰ 1{2.          Ÿ

                        6. Examples of bounds on sectional nonassociativity
   A Euclidean metrized algebra pA, ˝, hq has nonnegative sectional nonassociativity if and only if
(6.1)          0 ď hprx, x, ys, yq “ hpx ˝ x, y ˝ yq ´ hpx ˝ y, y ˝ xq,               for all x, y P A.
That is, the associator endomorphism A˝ px, xq “ rx, x, ¨ s is nonnegative definite for all x P A. For metrized
commutative algebras (6.1) is known as the Norton inequality because S. P. Norton showed that it holds for
the Griess algebra of the monster finite simple group [12, 46].
Example 6.1. A vertex operator algebra (VOA) over a field k of characteristic zero is a k-vector space V
                                                  Y : V Ñ pEnd Vqrrz, z ´1ss taking values in endomorphism-
equipped with a linear state-field correspondence ř
valued formal power series and written Y pa, zq “ nPZ apnq z ´n´1 P pEnd Vqrrz, z ´1ss, and two distinguished
vectors, the vacuum vector 1 P V and the conformal vector ω P V, that together satisfy some axioms that
can be found in [21, 22, 31].
16                                                 DANIEL J. F. FOX

                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                     ´m
   The axioms include that the endomorphisms Lm “ ωpm`1q satisfy rLm , Ln s “ pm´nqLm`n ` m 12          cδm`n,0
for some c P k called the central charge of the VOA, and that the operator L0 “ ωp1q is semisimple and there
is a direct sum decomposition V “ ‘8           n          n
                                          n“0 V where V is the eigenspace of L0 with eigenvalue n, which is
moreover finite-dimensional for all n ě 0. These force 1 P V0 and Vipnq Vj Ă Vi`j´n´1 .
   A VOA is OZ (short for one-zero) if V0 is generated by 1 and V1 “ t0u. For an OZ VOA, the multiplication
‹ defined by a ‹ b “ ap1q b for a, b P V2 makes V2 into a commutative algebra and the symmetric bilinear form
g defined by gpa, bq1 “ ap3q b for a, b P V2 is invariant with respect to ‹. This is explained in detail in [25,
section 3.5] and [41, Section 8]. By definition, L‹ pωq “ 2 IdA and gpω, ωq “ c{2. Hence e “ ω{2 is a unit in
V2 such that gpe, eq “ c{8. The triple pV2 , ‹, gq is called the Griess algebra of the OZ VOA.
   By a theorem of Miyamoto [43, Theorem 6.3], the Griess algebra of a real OZ VOA having a positive
definite invariant bilinear form satisfies the Norton inequality, so has nonnegative sectional nonassociativity.
   Because, as mentioned in the introduction, the simple Euclidean Jordan algebras can be obtained as
Griess algebras of VOAs, it follows from the theorem of Miyamoto that they have nonnegative sectional
nonassociativity. Theorem 6.3 indicates a direct proof (it is not hard) and the characterization of equality. Ÿ
   Nonpositive sectional nonassociativity is equivalent to the reverse Norton inequality, which is (6.1) with
the inequality reversed. Example 5.5 gives an example of algebras satisfying the reverse Norton inequality.
   Example 6.2 shows the sectional nonassociativities of symmetric composition algebras can take both signs
and shows sharp upper and lower bounds for them.
Example 6.2. A composition algebra is symmetric if the symmetric bilinear form hpx, yq “ qpx` yq´ qpxq´
qpyq is invariant. Basic results about symmetric composition algebras are given in [32, Chapter 34]. Any
Hurwitz algebra pA, ˝, q, eq has an associated para-Hurwitz algebra pA, ˛, qq that is a symmetric composition
algebra. Its multiplication is the isotope of ˝ determined by the canonical involution and so defined by
x ˛ y “ x̄ ˝ ȳ. It is not unital, but the unit e of the original Hurwitz algebra is a distinguished idempotent
for which L˛ peq “ R˛ peq is the canonical involution of the original Hurwitz algebra.
   Symmetric composition algebras have been classified by A. Elduque and H. C. Myung in [14, 15, 16, 32];
not quite all examples are given by the para-Hurwitz and forms of what are known as Okubo or Petersen
algebras. In particular, a symmetric composition algebra has dimension in t1, 2, 4, 8u, it is alternative, it is
nonunital if dim A ą 1, and it is commutative if and only if dim A ď 2.
Lemma 6.1. Let pA, ˝, qq be a real symmetric composition algebra having associated bilinear form h. If h is
positive definite, the sectional nonassociativity of pA, ˝, hq satisfies |Kpx, yq| ď 1 for all linearly independent
x, y P A. There holds Kpx, yq “ 1 if and only if x ˝ x and y ˝ y are linearly dependent, and there holds
Kpx, yq “ ´1 if and only if x ˝ y “ y ˝ x.
Proof. Linearizing the relation qpx ˝ yq “ qpxqqpyq shows that h satisfies
(6.2)           hpx ˝ y, w ˝ zq ` hpw ˝ y, x ˝ zq “ hpx, wqhpy, zq “ hpy ˝ x, z ˝ wq ` hpz ˝ x, y ˝ wq.
Taking z “ x and w “ y in (6.2) yields
(6.3)                                hpx ˝ y, y ˝ xq ` hpx ˝ x, y ˝ yq “ hpx, yq2 ,
while the multiplicativity of q yields 2|x ˝ y|2 “ |x|2 |y|2 “ 2|y ˝ x|2 . Together these yield
(6.4)                     |x|2 |y|2 ´ hpx, yq2 “ 2|x ˝ y|2 ´ hpx ˝ y, y ˝ xq ´ hpx ˝ x, y ˝ yq.
There results
                                                       2p|x˝y|2 ´hpx˝y,y˝xqq                      2
(6.5)      Kpx, yq “ hpx˝x,y˝yq´hpx˝y,y˝xq
                        |x|2 |y|2 ´hpx,yq2 “ ´1 `         |x|2 |y|2 ´hpx,yq2 “ ´1 ` |x||x˝y´y˝x|
                                                                                       2 |y|2 ´hpx,yq2 ě ´1,


where the second equality follows from |x ˝ y| “ |y ˝ x|. Equality holds if and only if x ˝ y “ y ˝ x. On the
other hand, (6.3) yields
                                                                         2                        2
(6.6)              Kpx, yq “ hpx˝x,y˝yq´hpx˝y,y˝xq
                                |x|2 |y|2 ´hpx,yq2 “ 2hpx˝x,y˝yq´hpx,yq
                                                       |x|2 |y|2 ´hpx,yq2 ď 2|x˝x||y˝y|´hpx,yq
                                                                              |x|2 |y|2 ´hpx,yq2 “ 1,
the inequality by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, and the last equality because 2|x ˝ x|2 “ |x|4 . Equality
holds if and only if x ˝ x and y ˝ y are linearly dependent.                                            
                            SECTIONAL NONASSOCIATIVITY OF METRIZED ALGEBRAS                                         17


   Lemma 6.1 implies that a para-Hurwitz algebra has sectional nonassociativities of both signs provided
its dimension is at least 4. For a para-Hurwitz algebra pA, ˛, qq with underlying Hurwitz algebra pA, ˝, q, eq,
there holds hpx, eq “ 0 if and only if x ˛ x “ ´ 21 hpx, xqe and x is not a multiple of e. Consequently, by
Lemma 6.1, there holds Kh,˛ pe, xq “ ´1 if hpx, eq “ 0 and Kh,˛ px, yq “ 1 if hpx, eq “ 0, hpy, eq “ 0, and x
and y are linearly independent. The latter case cannot occur for a two-dimensional para-Hurwitz algebra,
but does occur for para-quaternions or para-octonions. On the other hand, it follows that a two-dimensional
para-Hurwitz algebra has constant sectional nonassociativity ´1.
   The complex Okubo algebra is B “ slp3, Cq equipped with the multiplication
                                         2
                                                                 ω´ω 2
             x ‹ y “ ωxy ´ ω 2 yx ` ω´ω                1
                                                                        xy ` yx ` 32 hpx, yqI .
                                                                       `                     ˘
(6.7)                                  3 hpx, yqI “ ´ 2 rx, ys `   2
where juxtaposition indicates the ordinary matrix product, rx, ys “ xy ´ yx is the usual matrix commutator,
hpx, yq “ ´ trpxyq, and ω is a nontrivial cube root of unity (so ω ` ω 2 “ ´1). The product (6.7) or an
equivalent product was studied independently by Okubo [47, 49, 51], Petersson [53], and by Laquer [37] (as
one of a family of products on supnq).
   From (6.7) it is apparent that rx, ys‹ “ ´rx, ys so that pB, ‹q is Lie-admissible, with underlying Lie
algebra isomorphic to slp3, Cq with the opposite of the usual Lie bracket. The underlying symmetric product
x d y “ pω ´ ω 2 qpxy ` yx ` 32 hpx, yqIq is a rescaling of the usual trace-free Jordan product.
   Straightforward computations show rx, y, zs‹ “ ry, rz, xss ´ hpx, yqz ` hpz, yqx, so that px ‹ yq ‹ x “
1
2 hpx, xqy “ x ‹ py ‹ xq, showing pB, ‹q is a symmetric composition algebra. Its sectional nonassociativity
satisfies
                                               hprx,x,ys‹ ,yq          hprx,ys,rx,ysq
(6.8)                      KB,‹,h px, yq “ hpx,xqhpy,yq´hpx,yq 2 “ hpx,xqhpy,yq´hpx,yq2 ´ 1.


The real linear map σ P EndR pBq defined by σpxq “ ´x̄t is an order two isometric automorphism of pB, ‹q.
Its fixed point set is A “ sup3q, and so pA, ‹q is a subalgebra metrized by the Euclidean inner product
hpx, yq “ 12 trpx̄t y ` ȳ t xq. The algebra pA, ‹, hq is the compact real form of the Okubo algebra. From (6.8) it
follows that ´1 ď KA,‹,h px, yq with equality if and only if rx, ys “ 0. As explained in Remark 7.4, from the
Böttcher-Wenzel-Chern-do Carmo-Kobayashi inequality, Theorem 7.1, it follows that |rx, ys|2 ď 2|x|2 |y|2 for
x, y P sup3q, so, from (6.8) it follows that 1 ě KA,‹,h px, yq; the case of equality is characterized in Theorem
7.1.                                                                                                             Ÿ
   The remainder of this section is devoted to the formulation and proof of Theorem 6.3, which gives sharp
bounds on sectional nonassociativity of simple Euclidean Jordan algebras.
   Let Mpn, hq denote the n ˆ n matrices over the Hurwitz algebra h. The subspace of n ˆ n Hermitian
matrices over h is the subspace Hermpn, hq “ tx P Mpn, hq : x̄t “ xu comprising the fixed points of the
conjugate transpose x Ñ x̄t . The space Hermpn, hq is a commutative algebra with unit the identity matrix,
I, when equipped with the symmetrized matrix product x ‹ y “ 12 pxy ` yxq, where juxtaposition, as in the
expression xy, indicates the matrix product in Hermpn, hq. The algebra pHermpn, hq, ‹q is Jordan if h is
associative or h “ O and n “ 3 [30, Section III.1, Theorem 1]. The algebra pHermp2, hq, ‹q is isomorphic to
the p2 ` dim hq-dimensional Jordan algebra of a quadratic form often called a spin factor; this follows from
the observation that the ‹-square of a trace-free element is a multiple of the unit.
   The matrix trace tr : Mpn, hq Ñ h is a k-linear map satisfying trpx̄t q “ trpx̄q “ trpxq and so also
                                                                                      1
tptrpxqq “ trpx ` x̄q. The k-bilinear form h on Mpn, hq defined by hpx, yq “ 2n         tptrpx̄t yqq is symmetric (even
                                                                                      1
when h is noncommutative). Its restriction to Hermpn, hq satisfies hpx, yq “ 2n tptrpxyqq “ n1 tptrpx ‹ yqq. The
dimension dependent constant factor is a normalization.
   The nucleus NpA, ˝q of an algebra pA, ˝q is the set of elements a P A such that there vanish the associators
ra, x, ys, rx, a, ys, and ry, a, xs for all x, y P A. It is straightforward to see that if pA, ˝q is commutative, then
NpA, ˝q “ ta P A : rL˝ paq, L˝ pxqs “ 0 for all x P Au. If a unital Jordan algebra pA, ˝q has nondegenerate trace
form tr L˝ px ˝ yq and σ P S 2 A˚ is an invariant symmetric bilinear form, then there is z P NpA, ˝q such that
σpx, yq “ tr L˝ ppz ˝ xq ˝ yq for all x, y P A [33, Chapter 3, Theorem 10].
Lemma 6.2. Suppose char k ﬄ 2n. Let h be a d-dimensional Hurwitz k-algebra and let N “ n ` dnpn ´
1q{2. The symmetric bilinear form h on Hermpn, hq defined by hpx, yq “ 2n         1
                                                                                    tptrpxyqq “ n1 tptrpx ‹ yqq is
nondegenerate and invariant and satisfies tr L‹ px, yq “ N hpx, yq for all x, y P Hermpn, hq.
18                                                  DANIEL J. F. FOX


Proof. A consequence of the involutive invariance of the metric h on h is that the linear map t : h Ñ R
defined by tpxq “ x ` x̄ satisfies
(6.9)       tppxyqzq “ hppxyqz, eq “ hpxy, z̄q “ hpx, z̄ ȳq “ hpxpyzq, eq “ tpxpyzqq,             for x, y, z P h.
From (6.9) it follows that tptrppxyqzqq “ trppxyqz ` z̄pȳ x̄qq “ trpxpyzq ` pz̄ ȳqx̄q “ tptrpxpyzqq for x, y, z P
Mpn, hq, and there follows
                  2nhpx ‹ y, zq “ 2tptrpx ‹ yqzq “ tptrppxyqzqq ` tptrppyxqzqq
(6.10)                           “ tptrpxpyzqqq ` tptrpzpyxqq “ tptrpxpyzqqq ` tptrppzyqxqq
                                 “ tptrpxpyzqqq ` tptrpxpzyqqq “ 2tptrpxpy ‹ zqq “ 2nhpx, y ‹ zq,
showing h is invariant on Hermpn, hq. Using a basis of Hermpn, hq as in [30, pp. 125 ´ 126] is straightforward
to check that h is nondegenerate.
   From the invariance of h is follows that there is z P NpHermpn, hq, ‹q such that hpx, yq “ tr L‹ ppz ‹ xq ‹ yq
for all x, y P Hermpn, hq. The center of a Jordan algebra is the subset of its nucleus comprising elements
that commute with all other elements. By a theorem of A. A. Albert [1], the nucleus of a simple Jordan
k-algebra (char k ‰ 2) equals its center. Consequently, since pHermpn, hq, ‹q is simple, its nucleus equals its
center. Because pHermpn, hq, ‹q is central simple, its center is its subalgebra, isomorphic to k, spanned by
its unit [30, Chapter 5, Section 7]. It follows that z is a multiple of the unit, so h is a multiple of tr L‹ p ¨ ‹ ¨ q.
Because hpe, eq “ 1 and tr L‹ pe ‹ eq “ dim Hermpn, hq “ N “ n ` dnpn ´ 1q{2 where d “ dim h, it follows
that tr L‹ p ¨ ‹ ¨ q “ N h.                                                                                         

   The simple Euclidean Jordan algebras are classified; a modern exposition is [17]. A simple Euclidean
Jordan algebra of rank n ě 4 is isomorphic to Hermpn, hq for h an associative Hurwitz algebra and a simple
Euclidean Jordan algebra of rank n “ 3 is isomorphic to Hermpn, hq for h a Hurwitz algebra. The rank 2
case consists of the spin factor algebras; as mentioned these include Hermp2, hq.
   In the statement of Theorem 6.3, eij denotes the matrix with a 1 in the ij entry and 0 in other entries.
Theorem 6.3. Let h be a real Hurwitz algebra. Equip pHermpn, hq, ‹q with the invariant metric hpx, yq “
N ´1 tr L‹ px ‹ yq “ n´1 trpx ‹ yq where N “ dim Hermpn, hq and n ě 2 is the rank of Hermpn, hq. For linearly
independent x, y P Hermpn, hq, the sectional nonassociativity of pHermpn, hq, ‹, hq satisfies
(6.11)                                      0 ď Kpx, yq “ Kh,‹ px, yq ď n2 ,
for all linearly independent x, y P Hermpn, hq.
    (1) If h is associative, equality holds in the lower bound of (6.11) if and only if x and y commute with
         respect to the matrix product; in particular, if x and x‹x are linearly independent, then Kpx, x‹xq “ 0.
    (2) Equality holds in the upper bound of (6.11) if and only if x and y are simultaneously equivalent under
         AutpHermpn, hq, ‹q to scalar multiples of e11 ´ enn and e1n ` en1 .
Proof. For x, y P Mpn, hq, let rx, ys “ xy ´ yx. By (4.14), the associators of ‹ and the matrix product ¨ satisfy
(6.12)                      4rx, y, zs‹ “ 2rx, y, zs¨ ´ 2rz, y, xs¨ ` rx, ry, zss ` rz, rx, yss.
If h is associative, pMpn, hq, ¨q is associative, so (6.12) becomes simply 4rx, y, zs‹ “ ry, rx, zss. Hence
                                                                                              1
              hpx ‹ x, z ‹ zq ´ hpx ‹ z, z ‹ xq “ hprx, x, zs‹ , zq “ 41 hprx, rx, zss, zq “ 4n trprx, rx, zss ‹ yq
(6.13)                                                                                                    t
                                 1                                       1                   1
                              “ 8n tr prx, rx, zssz ` zrx, rx, zssq “ ´ 4n trrx, zsrx, zs “ 4n tr rx, zs rx, zs.
When h is associative, an automorphism of pHermpn, hq, ‹q preserves the ordinary matrix product and
commutator bracket on Mpn, hq, but I do not know if this is true when h “ O, so in this case the following
alternative argument is given (it works for associative h too).
   Recall that the principal axis theorem states that every element of Hermpn, hq (where n ď 3 if h “ O) is
equivalent via an element of AutpHermpn, hq, ‹q to a diagonal matrix. For h P tR, C, Hu this is well known.
For h “ O this is [23, Theorem 5.1]; see also [17, Theorem V.2.5].
                              SECTIONAL NONASSOCIATIVITY OF METRIZED ALGEBRAS                                            19


  By the principal axis theorem there are g P AutpHermpn, hq, ‹qq and diagonal λ P Hermpn, hq such that
x “ gλ. Let y “ g ´1 z. Since λ is Hermitian its elements are real, so L¨ pλ ¨ λq “ L¨ pλq2 and R¨ pλ ¨ λq “ R¨ pλq2 ,
and hence rλ, λ, ys¨ “ ry, λ, λs¨ “ 0. In (6.12) this yields
(6.14)                                   4rx, x, zs‹ “ 4grλ, λ, ys‹ “ grλ, rλ, yss.
As in (6.13) this yields
         hpx ‹ x, z ‹ zq ´ hpx ‹ z, z ‹ xq “ hprx, x, zs‹ , zq “ 41 hpgrλ, rλ, yss, gyq “ 41 hprλ, rλ, yss, yq
(6.15)                                                                                                              t
              1                        1                                       1                   1
           “ 4n trprλ, rλ, yss ‹ yq “ 8n tr prλ, rλ, yssy ` yrλ, rλ, yssq “ ´ 4n trrλ, ysrλ, ys “ 4n tr rλ, ys rλ, ys,
where, in the case h “ O, the penultimate equality follows from the invariance trprx, yszq ` trpyrx, zsq “ 0
for x, y, z P Hermpn, hq proved in [23, section 4.4]. By (6.13) and (6.15), Kpx, yq ě 0. If h is associative,
by (6.13), equality holds if and only if rx, ys “ 0; in particular, rx ‹ x, xs “ rx, x, xs‹ “ 0 because ‹ is
commutative, so if x and x ‹ x are linearly independent, then Kpx, x ‹ xq “ 0.
   Since tr x̄t x equals the Frobenius norm on Hermpn, hq, by Lemma 7.2, if h is associative
                                                                   t
                                                        1
                                                          tr rx, zs rx, zs ď n2 |x|2 |z|2 ´ hpx, zq2 ,
                                                                               `                    ˘
(6.16)             hpx ‹ x, z ‹ zq ´ hpx ‹ z, z ‹ xq “ 4n
which shows the upper bound in (6.11). The characterization of the equality case in Lemma 7.2 yields the
characterization of the equality case in the upper bound of (6.11). If h “ O, then by Lemma 7.2,
                                 t           ` 2 2            2
                                                                ˘ n` 2 2
                      1                    n
                                                                 “ 2 |x| |z| ´ hpx, zq2 ,
                                                                                       ˘
(6.17)               4n tr rλ, ys rλ, ys ď 2 |λ| |y| ´ hpλ, yq

(where n “ 3) and in (6.15) this shows the upper bound in (6.11). The characterization of the equality case
in Lemma 7.2 again yields the characterization of the equality case in the upper bound of (6.11).        

           7. The Chern-do Carmo-Kobayashi inequality over real Hurwitz algebras
  The Frobenius bilinear form f px, yq “ Re tr x̄t y “ 21 trpx̄t y ` ȳ t xq on Mpn, hq is symmetric [17, proposition
V.2.1] and positive definite (this is true for h “ O even if n ą 3).
Lemma 7.1. Let h be a real Hurwitz algebra. Let Mpn, hq be metrized by f px, yq “ Re tr x̄t y. The number
                                                !                                )
                                                  |rx,ys|2
(7.1)                   W “ WpMpn, hqq “ sup |x|     2 |y|2 : x, y P Mpn, hqzt0u


is finite and
(7.2)           |rx, ys|2 ď Wp|x|2 |y|2 ´ f px, yq2 q ď W|x|2 |y|2 ,                      for all x, y P Mpn, hq.
If |rx, ys|2 ď Wp|x|2 |y|2 ´ f px, yq2 q then p “ |y|x ´ |x|y and q “ |y|x ` |x|y satisfy |rp, qs|2 “ W|p|2 |q|2 .
Proof. The Cauchy-Schwarz inequality implies directly WpMpn, hqq ď 4, which shows WpMpn, hqq is finite
but is not optimal. The following argument from the proof of [66, Theorem 2.2] shows that the apparently
weaker inequality |rx, ys|2 ď WpMpn, hqq|x|2 |y|2 implies the first inequality of (7.2). If either x or y equals
0 there is nothing to show, so suppose x ‰ 0 and y ‰ 0. Take p “ |y|x ´ |x|y and q “ |y|x ` |x|y. Then
rp, qs “ 2|x||y|rx, ys, and straightforward computation shows
(7.3)                  |rx, ys|2 “ 4|x|12 |y|2 |rp, qs|2 ď 2|x|12 |y|2 |p|2 |q|2 “ 2p|x|2 |y|2 ´ f px, yq2 q.
If there is equality in the first inequality of (7.2), then (7.3) shows that |rp, qs|2 “ W|p|2 |q|2 .                    
   The Böttcher-Wenzel inequality was first proved for real symmetric matrices, with a characterization of
the equality |rx, ys|2f “ 2|x|2f |y|2f , as [11, Lemma 1]. It was proved for Mpn, Cq in full generality by Z. Lu in
[38] and as stated in the proof of [7, Theorem 3.1]. A nice exposition of the proof of (7.4), following [4], is
in [67, chapter 9]. For variants and discussion see [4, 6, 7, 10, 38, 39, 67] among many references.
Theorem 7.1 ([7, 11, 38]). There holds WpMpn, Cqq “ 2. That is, for the inner product f px, yq “ Re tr x̄t y,
(7.4)             |rx, ys|2 ď 2p|x|2 |y|2 ´ f px, yq2 q ď 2|x|2 |y|2 ,                      for x, y P Mpn, Cq.
20                                                      DANIEL J. F. FOX


     (1) If either x, y P Hermpn, Cq or x, y P supnq, then |rx, ys|2 “ 2|x|2 |y|2 if and only if x and y are
         simultaneously unitarily conjugate to scalar multiples of e11 ´ enn and e1n ` en1 .
     (2) If either x, y P Hermpn, Cq or x, y P supnq, then |rx, ys|2 “ 2p|x|2 |y|2 ´ f px, yq2 q if and only if x and
         y either are linearly dependent over C or are simultaneously unitarily conjugate to scalar multiples
         of e11 ´ enn and e1n ` en1 .
Proof. Characterizations of equality in (7.4) are given in various references, for instance [7]. Here these
characterizations are needed when x, y P Hermpn, Cq. Since multiplication by i is an isometric real linear
isomorphism from supnq to Hermpn, Cq, the validity of either of (1) or (2) for x and y both Hermitian or both
anti-Hermitian implies its validity for the other class. The characterization of equality in (1) for Hermitian
matrices is proved as it is in [11] for Hermpn, Rq; see the proof of Lemma 7.2 below. Suppose there holds
|rx, ys|2 “ 2p|x|2 |y|2 ´ f px, yq2 q in (7.4) for linearly independent x, y P Hermpn, Cq. Then (7.3) shows that
the Hermitian matrices p and q satisfy |rp, qs|2 “ 2|p|2 |q|2 , so, by (1), are simultaneously unitarily conjugate
to (nonzero) scalar multiples of e11 ´ enn and e1n ` en1 . Since this implies that |p|2 “ |q|2 , from x “ p`q  2|x|
and y “ q´p                                                                     2      2   2
           2|y| it follows that f px, yq “ 0, so, by (7.3), there holds |rx, ys| “ 2|x| |y| . By (1), x and y are
simultaneously unitarily conjugate to scalar multiples of e11 ´ enn and e1n ` en1 . This proves (2).             
   The inequality (7.4) is not valid over H and O. Taking x “ iI and y “ jI P Mpn, Hq shows WpMpn, hqq ě 4
when h P tH, Ou. In [24, Theorem 3.1] it is shown that WpMpn, Hqq “ 4 and the equality case is characterized.
Nonetheless, the proof of (7.4) given in [11] for Hermpn, Rq adapts for Hermpn, hq over any real Hurwitz
algebra h P tR, C, H, Ou. Over R or C, because a Hermitian matrix is unitarily diagonalizable, it suffices to
prove the claim in the case one of the matrices is diagonal. This proof requires the prinicipal axis theorem,
which is valid over H and O, and one has to check that the noncommutativity of H and O does not effect
the rest of the argument. This works over H, but the reduction via diagonalization faces an obstacle over O,
namely that, for x, y P Hermpn, hq, the inequality (7.4) is not manifestly invariant with respect to the action
of AutpHermpn, hq, ‹q. Over associative h, AutpHermpn, hqq preserves the commutator of the matrix product
on Mpn, hq restricted to Hermpn, hq, but when h “ O, in which case AutpHermp3, Oqq is the compact form
of the simple real Lie group of type F4 [58], it is not clear to the author whether this is true. However the
partial result, that (7.4) holds when x is diagonal, is true, and this suffices for the application to sectional
nonassociativity in the proof of Theorem 6.3.
Lemma 7.2. Let h be a real Hurwitz algebra. Let f px, yq “ Re tr x̄t y on Mpn, hq.
  (1) If h is associative, for all x, y P Hermpn, hq there holds
(7.5)                                   |rx, ys|2 ď 2p|x|2 |y|2 ´ f px, yq2 q ď 2|x|2 |y|2 .
     (2) If h “ O and n “ 3, (7.5) holds for all y P Hermp3, Oq and all diagonal x P Hermp3, Oq.
     (3) The equality |rx, ys|2 “ 2|x|2 |y|2 holds in (7.5) (where, if h “ O and n “ 3, x is assumed diagonal)
         if and only if x and y are simultaneously equivalent via an automorphism of the Jordan algebra
         pHermpn, hq, ‹q to real multiples of e11 ´ enn and e1n ` en1 .
     (4) The equality |rx, ys|2 “ 2p|x|2 |y|2 ´ f px, yq2 q holds in (7.5) (where, if h “ O and n “ 3, x is assumed
         diagonal) if and only if x and y are either linearly dependent over h or are simultaneously equivalent
         via an automorphism of the Jordan algebra pHermpn, hq, ‹q to real multiples of e11 ´enn and e1n `en1 .
Proof. Suppose x P Hermpn, hq is diagonal, where n “ 3 if h “ O. Since x is Hermitian, its entries are real.
Let xi “ xii . Then rx, ysij “ xi yij ´ yij xj “ pxi ´ xj qyij , the last equality because xj is real, so in the center
of h. Now the proof goes through as in [11]:
                       ÿn                           n
                                                    ÿ                         n
                                                                              ÿ      n
                                                                                     ÿ
(7.6)      |rx, ys|2 “      pxi ´ xj q2 |yij |2 ď 2   px2i ` x2j q|yij |2 ď 2    x2k    |yij |2 “ 2|x|2 |y|2 .
                        i,j“1                          i,j“1                       k“1     i,j“1
                    2           2   2
This proves |rx, ys| ď 2|x| |y| for diagonal x. By the principal axis theorem, any element of pHermpn, hq, ‹q
is equivalent via an automorphism of pHermpn, hq, ‹q to a diagonal matrix. Since an automorphism of
pHermpn, hq, ‹q preserves the trace, it is isometric, and, when h is associative it preserves the commutator of
the matrix product on Mpn, hq restricted to Hermpn, hq, when h is associative to prove |rx, ys|2 ď 2|x|2 |y|2 in
                               SECTIONAL NONASSOCIATIVITY OF METRIZED ALGEBRAS                                                             21


general it suffices to prove it when x is diagonal. By Lemma 7.1, in either case |rx, ys|2 ď 2|x|2 |y|2 implies
(7.5).
   The characterization of the equality case (3) goes through as in the proof of [11, Lemma 1]. Precisely, if
there is equality in (7.6), then
                     n
                     ÿ                       ÿ                               n
                                                                             ÿ           n
                                                                                         ÿ                   ÿ
(7.7)         0“4          x2i |yii |2 ` 2         pxi ` xj q2 |yij |2 “ 2         x2k         |yii |2 ` 2         pxi ` xj q2 |yij |2 .
                     i“1                     i‰j                             k“1         i“1                 i‰j

If x is nonzero, this implies yii “ 0 for 1 ď i ď n, xi ` xj “ 0 when yij ‰ 0 for i ‰ j, and that at exactly
two of x1 , . . . , xn are nonzero. Suppose i ‰ j are the indices such that xi “ ´xj ‰ 0. It follows that
ykl “ 0 if tk, lu ‰ ti, ju. Hence x and y are scalar multiples of eii ´ ejj and eij ` eji , respectively. Since
AutpHermpn, hqq contains a subgroup acting as permutations on the diagonal subalgebra of Hermpn, hq, it
can be assumed that i “ 1 and j “ n. The proof of the equality case (4) follows from (3) exactly as in the
proof of (2) of Theorem 7.1.                                                                                 
Remark 7.2. Although the same difficulty related to diagonalization occurs in the proof of Theorem 6.3
as occurs in the proof of Lemma 7.2, the end result in Theorem 6.3 is stated in terms manifestly invariant
with respect to AutpHermpn, hqq, and as a result takes the same form whether or not h is associative.
This observation suggests that the upper bound on sectional nonassociativity, which is closely related to
the commutator bound, is the more natural bound to consider, at least from the algebraic point of view,
although it could also simply reflect a technical deficiency in the proof of Lemma 7.2.                    Ÿ
Remark 7.3. It would be useful to know whether (7.5) is true for Hermp3, Oq. This seems likely. More,
generally, it would be interesting to know whether (7.5) is true for Hermpn, Oq for n ą 3. This would follow
from a principal axis theorem and a characterization of the automorphism group, but it appears that neither
is known. See [69] for what is known in this regard.                                                       Ÿ
Remark 7.4. For a compact semisimple real Lie algebra g with Killing form Bg the number
                                                                                ´Bg prx, ys, rx, ysq
(7.8)                 Wpgq “ Upg, r ¨ , ¨ s, ´Bg q “               sup                                   2
                                                               x,yPg:x^y‰0 Bg px, xqBg py, yq ´ Bg px, yq

is positive and finite, by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. Its value is a basic automorphism invariant of
pg, r ¨ , ¨ sq. Its calculation for particular g can be viewed as a refinement of the Böttcher-Wenzel inequality.
On the other hand, for some compact simple real Lie algebras Wpgq can be estimated using the Böttcher-
Wenzel inequality. For supnq and sopnq, Bsupnq px, yq “ ´2nf px, yq and Bsopnq px, yq “ ´pn ´ 2qf px, yq where
f px, yq “ tr x̄t y, so in these cases it follows from the Böttcher-Wenzel inequality, Theorem 7.1, that
(7.9)                                     2
                              Wpsopnqq ď n´2 ,                                                  Wpsupnqq ď n1 .
For the special case of sopnq, viewed as antisymmetric matrices, equipped with the Frobenius norm f , the
                                               |rx,ys|                      ?
essentially equivalent quantity supx,yPg:x^y‰0 |x|f |y|ff was shown to equal 2 if n ě 4 in [5, Theorem 6]. By
Lemma 7.3, these estimates yield sharp numerical bounds on the sectional nonassociativites of the subspaces
spanned by decomposable elements in algebras such as sopmq b sopnq, sopmq b supnq, and supmq b supnq. Ÿ
   Lemma 7.3 shows a partial lower bound on the sectional nonassociativities of the tensor product of Lie
algebras.
Lemma 7.3. For compact semisimple real Lie algebras g and h, let τ˝ be the Killing form of the tensor
product algebra pg b h, ˝q, defined by τ˝ pa, bq “ tr L˝ paqL˝ pbq for a, b P g b h. The sectional nonassociativity
of the subspace of pg b h, ˝, τ˝ q spanned by decomposable elements a1 b b1 , a2 b b2 P g b h satisfies
(7.10)                                       0 ě Kpa1 b b1 , a2 b b2 q ě ´WpgqWphq.
Proof. Because g and h are compact, their Killing forms, Bg and Bh , satisfy ´Bg pra1 , a2 s, ra1 , a2 sq ě 0 and
´Bh prb1 , b2 s, rb1 , b2 sq ě 0. The upper bound in (7.10) follows from
                                                                B pra ,a s,ra ,a sqB prb ,b s,rb ,b sq
(7.11)        Kpa1 b b1 , a2 b b2 q “ ´ Bg pa1 ,a1 qBg pag2 ,a21qB2h pb1 ,b                                          2 ď 0,
                                                                         1 2      h    1 2     1 2
                                                                                                       2
                                                                           1 qBh pb2 ,b2 q´Bg pa1 ,a2 q Bh pb1 ,b2 q
22                                                            DANIEL J. F. FOX


where the positivity of the denominator follows from the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. On the other hand, by
definition of Wpgq and Wphq,
                  1 bb1 ,a2 bb2 q                                p´B pra ,a s,ra ,a sqqp´B prb ,b s,rb ,b sqq
             ´ KpaWpgqWphq             1
                                  “ WpgqWphq                 g    1 2     1 2            h   1 2     1 2
                                             Bg pa1 ,a1 qBg pa2 ,a2 qBh pb1 ,b1 qBh pb2 ,b2 q´Bg pa1 ,a2 q2 Bh pb1 ,b2 q2
                    pBg pa1 ,a1 qBg pa2 ,a2 q´Bg pa1 ,a2 q2 qpBh pb1 ,b1 qBh pb2 ,b2 q´Bh pb1 ,b2 q2 q
(7.12)          ď      Bg pa1 ,a1 qBg pa2 ,a2 qBh pb1 ,b1 qBh pb2 ,b2 q´Bg pa1 ,a2 q2 Bh pb1 ,b2 q2
                         Bg pa1 ,a2 q2 pBh pb1 ,b1 qBh pb2 ,b2 q´Bh pb1 ,b2 q2 q`Bh pb1 ,b2 q2 pBg pa1 ,a1 qBg pa2 ,a2 q´Bg pa1 ,a2 q2 q
                “1´                       Bg pa1 ,a1 qBg pa2 ,a2 qBh pb1 ,b1 qBh pb2 ,b2 q´Bg pa1 ,a2 q2 Bh pb1 ,b2 q2                   ď 1,
which shows the lower bound in (7.10).                                                                                                          
  Note that Lemma 7.3 does not imply that g b h has nonpositive sectional nonassociativity. In fact, for
any compact simple real Lie algebra g, sop3q b g has sectional nonassociativities of both signs [18].
Remark 7.5. Although this does not seem to be realized widely, for anti-Hermitian matrices the inequality
(7.4) is closely related to Vinberg’s results on invariant norms on compact simple Lie algebras in [64] applied
in the special case of supnq. Precisely, Vinberg shows that, for an invariant norm, || ¨ || on a compact simple
Lie algebra g the quantity θpxq “ sup0‰yPg ||rx,ys||
                                                  ||y||   does not depend on the choice of invariant norm, and
equals the spectral norm of adg pxq. Since, by definition, θprx, ysq ď θpxqθpyq, taking g to be a compact
simple Lie algebra of matrices, e.g. antisymmetric or anti-Hermitian matrices, and taking || ¨ || to be the
Frobenius norm there  ? results |rx, ys|f ď θpxq|y|f . It suffices then to check that the spectral norm of adg pxq
is no greater than 2|x|f . In the case g “ supnq this can be shown as follows. Since any anti-Hermitian
matrix is unitarily conjugate to a diagonal matrix and the spectral norms of the adjoint representations of
unitarily conjugate matrices are the same, it suffices to consider the case of diagonal x P supnq. In this case
the nonzero eigenvalues of adsupnq pxq have the form λi ´ λj where λ1 , . . . , λn are the diagonal elements of x.
Since |λi ´ λj |2 ď 2|λ|2 ď 2|x|2f , where λ is the element of x with the greatest modulus, the spectral norm
                                   ?
of adsupnq pxq is no greater than 2|x|f .                                                                       Ÿ

     8. Consequences for commutative algebras of conditions on sectional nonassociativity
   This section describes some general structural consequences for commutative algebras of assumptions on
the sectional nonassociativity.
   Consequences of nonnegative sectional nonassociativity for commutative algebras can be found in [12,
section 17] and in [42], where they are applied to the study of maximal associative subalgebras of the Griess
algebra. By the analogy advocated here, associative subalgebras are analogous to flat submanifolds of a
nonnegatively curved Riemannian manifold. Here such results are cast in a somewhat more general setting.
   An element e P A is idempotent if e˝e “ e and square-zero if e˝e “ 0. Let IdempA, ˝q “ t0 ‰ e P A : e˝e “ eu
and Nil2 pA, ˝q “ t0 ‰ z P A : z ˝ z “ 0u.
Lemma 8.1. Let pA, ˝, hq be a Euclidean metrized commutative algebra.
  (1) If a ` ib P Nil2 pA bR C, ˝q and the R-span of a and b is two-dimensional, then
                                                                                  2
                                                                     |a˝a|
(8.1)                                                      Kpa, bq “ |a^b| 2 ě 0,


          with equality if and only if a and b span a trivial subalgebra of pA, ˝q.
      (2) If a ` ib P IdempA bR C, ˝q and the R-span of a and b is two-dimensional, then
                                                                              2       2
                                                                          `|b|
(8.2)                                                 Kpa, bq “ 41 4|b˝b|
                                                                      |a^b|2   ą 0.
Proof. That a ` ib P Nil2 pA bR C, ˝q is equivalent to the equations a ˝ a “ b ˝ b and a ˝ b “ 0, and in (4.13)
these yield (8.1). If equality holds in (8.1), then b ˝ b “ a ˝ a “ 0, so a and b generate a trivial subalgebra.
Suppose a ` ib P IdempA bR C, ˝q, so that a ˝ a ´ b ˝ b “ a and 2a ˝ b “ b. Then
(8.3)     hpa ˝ a, b ˝ bq ´ hpa ˝ b, a ˝ bq “ hpb ˝ b ` a, b ˝ bq “ |b ˝ b|2 ` hpb, a ˝ bq ´ 41 |b|2 “ |b ˝ b|2 ` 41 |b|2 ,
and in (4.13) this yields (8.2). In (8.2), equality cannot hold because it would imply b “ 0, contrary to
hypothesis.                                                                                            
                             SECTIONAL NONASSOCIATIVITY OF METRIZED ALGEBRAS                                           23


Theorem 8.1. Let pA, ˝, hq be a Euclidean metrized commutative algebra.
  (1) If pA, ˝, hq has negative sectional nonassociativity, then AutpA, ˝, hq is finite.
  (2) If pA, ˝, hq has nonpositive sectional nonassociativity, either AutpA, ˝, hq is finite or pA, ˝, hq contains
      a trivial subalgebra of dimension 1 or 2 (the possibilities are not exclusive).
Proof. For k ě 3, let θ be a multilinear k-form on a complex vector space V. By a theorem of H. Suzuki
[61, Theorem B], either the group of linear automorphisms of θ is finite or there is a nonzero vector v P V
such that θpv, . . . , v, wq “ 0 for all w P V. Regard µpx, y, zq “ hpx ˝ y, zq as a trilinear form on A bR C. An
orthogonal automorphism of pA, ˝, hq preserves µ, and extends to an automorphism of A bR C. By Suzuki’s
theorem if AutpA, ˝, hq is not finite there exists a ` ib P A bR C such that hppa ` ibq ˝ pa ` ibq, wq “ 0 for all
w P A bR C. By the nondegeneracy of h, a ` ib P Nil2 pA bR C, ˝q. Note that it is not asserted that a and b
are linearly independent over R. The conclusion follows from (1) of Lemma 8.1.                                  
  For a Euclidean metrized commutative algebra pA, ˝, hq, the endomorphism L˝ peq is h-self-adjoint for
any e P A. If e P IdempA, ˝q, then L˝ peq preserves xeyK “ ty P A : hpe, yq “ 0u, for if hpe, yq “ 0 then
hpL˝ peqy, eq “ hpy, e ˝ eq “ hpy, eq “ 0. Define the orthogonal spectrum
(8.4)                    SpecK peq “ tλ P k : there is x P kteuK such that L˝ peqx “ λxu,
so that Specpeq “ SpecK peq Y t1u. Because L˝ peq preserves xeyK it has an eigenvector in xeyK . Because
hpe, eq ą 0, this eigenvector is not a multiple of e, so in this case SpecK peq is not empty.
Lemma 8.2. Let pA, ˝, hq be a Euclidean metrized commutative algebra of dimension n ě 2. If 0 ‰ e P
IdempA, ˝q, then 4Kpe, xq ď |e|´2 for all x P A such that x ^ e ‰ 0, with equality if and only if x ´
hpe, eq´1 hpe, xqe P kerpL˝ peq ´ 21 IdA q.
Proof. Let e P IdempA, ˝q. Because Kpe, xq depends only on the subspace spanned by e and x, in computing
Kpe, xq it may be supposed that hpe, xq “ 0. Write x “ n´1                                       K
                                                           ř
                                                             i“1 xi where x1 , . . . , xn´1 P xey are h-orthogonal
eigenvectors of L˝ peq with (not necessarily distinct) eigenvalues λ1 , . . . , λn´1 . There results
                                                                                              n´1
                    hpe ˝ e, x ˝ xq ´ hpe ˝ x, e ˝ xq   hpe ˝ x, xq ´ hpe ˝ x, e ˝ xq      ´2
                                                                                              ÿ               |xi |2
(8.5)   Kpe, xq “                   2   2
                                                      “              2   2
                                                                                      “ |e|       λi p1 ´ λi q 2 .
                                 |e| |x|                          |e| |x|                     i“1
                                                                                                               |x|
          řn´1       2     2
Because     i“1 |xi | “ |x| , (8.5) exhibits Kpe, xq as a convex combination, so implies

(8.6)      |e|´2 mintλi p1 ´ λi q : 1 ď i ď n ´ 1u ď Kpe, xq ď |e|´2 maxtλi p1 ´ λi q : 1 ď i ď n ´ 1u.
As λp1 ´ λq ď 1{4 for all λ P R, (8.6) yields 4Kpe, xq ď |e|´2 . There holds equality if and only if λi “ 1{2 for
1 ď i ď n ´ 1, in which case x “ n´1
                                  ř
                                     i“1 xi is an eigenvector of L˝ peq with eigenvalue 1{2.                   
Lemma 8.3. Let pA, ˝, hq be a Euclidean metrized commutative algebra of dimension n ě 2. Let 0 ‰ e P
IdempA, ˝q.
   (1) If there is b P R such?
                               that KpUq
                                       ?
                                           ď b for all two-dimensional subspaces U Ă A containing e, then
            K              1´ B     1` B
        Spec peq Ă p´8, 2 s Y r 2 , 8q, where B “ maxt1 ´ 4b|e|2 , 0u. In particular, if pA, ˝, hq has
        nonpositive sectional nonassociativity, then SpecK peq X p0, 1q “ H.
   (2) If there is b P R such that KpUq ?  ě b for? all two-dimensional subspaces U Ă A containing e, then
                   2           K        1´ B 1` B
        b ď 1{p4|e| q and Spec peq Ă r 2 , 2 s for B “ 1 ´ 4b|e|2 ě 0. In particular, if pA, ˝, hq has
        nonnegative sectional nonassociativity, then SpecK peq Ă r0, 1s.
Proof. In the setting of (1), if 0 ‰ y P A is an eigenvector of L˝ peq with eigenvalue λ and orthogonal to e,
then, by (8.5), λp1 ´ λq “ |e|2 Kpe, yq ď b|e|2 , so λ2 ´ λ ` b|e|2 ě 0, which forces λ to be in the indicated
range. In the setting of (2), the same argument shows that λ2 ´ λ ` b|e|2 ě 0, which forces 1 ´ 4b|e|2 ě 0
and forces λ to be in the indicated range.                                                                  
   Next there are given some results showing that nonnegative sectional nonassociativity precludes the exis-
tence of square-zero elements.
24                                                DANIEL J. F. FOX


Lemma 8.4. If a nontrivial metrized algebra pA, ˝, hq satisfies A ˝ A “ A then its multiplication is faithful.
In particular, the multiplication of a metrized semisimple commutative algebra pA, ˝, hq is faithful.

Proof. If z P ker L˝ , then, by the invariance of h, 0 “ hpL˝ pzqx, yq “ hpz, x ˝ yq for all x, y P A. This
shows ker L is contained in the orthocomplement pA ˝ AqK of A ˝ A. In particular, if A ˝ A “ A, then
ker L˝ Ă pA ˝ AqK “ AK “ t0u, so L˝ is injective. If A “ ‘ki“1 Ai is a ř        direct sum of
                                                                                            ř simple ideals, then
Ai ˝ Aj “ t0u if i ‰ j, and, since Ai is simple, Ai ˝ Ai “ Ai , so A ˝ A “ i Ai ˝ Ai “ i Ai “ A, and L˝ is
injective. By the invariance of h, hpR˝ pyqx, zq “ hpx, L˝ pyqzq for all x, y, z P A, so were R˝ not injective, L˝
would not be injective.                                                                                          

Lemma 8.5. Let pA, ˝, hq be a Euclidean metrized commutative algebra. Let 0 ‰ z P Nil2 pA, ˝q. For 0 ‰ y P A
not in the span of z, Kpz, yq ď 0, with equality if and only if z ˝ y “ 0. In particular, Nil2 pA, ˝q “ t0u if there
holds either of the following conditions:
     (1) pA, ˝, hq has positive sectional nonassociativity.
     (2) pA, ˝, hq has nonnegative sectional nonassociativity and is semisimple.

Proof. Let 0 ‰ z P Nil2 pA, ˝q. For y P A linearly independent of z, there holds Kpz, yq|z ^ y|2 “ ´|L˝ pzqy|2 ď
0, with equality if and only if z ˝ y “ 0. In particular, pA, ˝, hq cannot have positive sectional nonassociativity,
and if pA, ˝, hq has nonnegative sectional nonassociativity, then L˝ pzqy “ 0 for all y P A, so L˝ pzq “ 0. By
Lemma 8.4, if L˝ pzq “ 0, then pA, ˝q is not semisimple.                                                         

  A commutative algebra is exact if tr L˝ pxq “ 0 for all x P A. Exactness is a condition analogous to
unimodularity of a Lie algebra. Evidently, an exact commutative algebra is not unital.

Lemma 8.6. A Euclidean metrized commutative algebra pA, ˝, hq with nontrivial multiplication and nonneg-
ative sectional nonassociativity is not exact.

Proof. By [62, Lemma 2.3], there exists a nontrivial idempotent e P IdempA, ˝q. Because L˝ peq is self-adjoint,
there is an h-orthogonal basis te, z1 , . . . , zn´1 u of A such that z1 , . . . , zn´1 are eigenvectors of L˝ peq with
(not necessarily distinct) eigenvalues λ1 , . . . , λn´1 P R. By (2) of Lemma 8.3, nonnegativity of the sectional
                                                                                               řn´1
nonassociativity implies λi P r0, 1s for 1 ď i ď n ´ 1. It follows that tr L˝ peq “ 1 ` i“1 λi ě 1, so pA, ˝q is
not exact.                                                                                                           

  In a commutative R-algebra pA, ˝q the set QpA, ˝q “ tx ˝ x : x P Au is a closed cone, the cone of squares.
By definition, IdempA, ˝q Ă QpA, ˝q.

Lemma 8.7. Let pA, ˝, hq be a Euclidean metrized commutative algebra having nonnegative sectional nonas-
sociativity. The set

(8.7)                               CpA, ˝, hq “ tx P A : L˝ pxq is nonnegativeu

is a closed convex cone containing QpA, ˝q for all x P A and consequently containing IdempA, ˝q.

Proof. That the sectional nonassociativity is nonnegative means that L˝ px ˝ xq ě L˝ pxq2 ě 0 for all x P
A. This shows IdempA, ˝q Ă QpA, ˝, hq Ă CpA, ˝, gq. In a Euclidean metrized commutative algebra every
multiplication endomorphism L˝ pxq is self-adjoint, so diagonalizable with real eigenvalues. If x, y P A and
t P r0, 1s then L˝ ptx` p1 ´ tqyq “ tL˝ pxq` p1 ´ tqL˝ pyq ě 0 because the set of nonnegative definite self-adjoint
endomorphisms of a Euclidean vector space is a closed convex cone.                                               

   With the hypotheses of Lemma 8.7, are the extreme rays of QpA, ˝q generated by elements of IdempA, ˝q?
This is true for the cones of squares in the simple Euclidean Jordan algebras over R or C; these are the
cones of nonnegative definite Hermitian matrices and their extremal rays are generated by the rank one
idempotents. For the Griess algebras of OZ VOAs (Example 6.1) it seems the question has not been studied.
                               SECTIONAL NONASSOCIATIVITY OF METRIZED ALGEBRAS                                               25


                                                       References
 1. A. A. Albert, On the nuclei of a simple Jordan algebra, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 50 (1963), 446–447.
 2. B. N. Allison, A class of nonassociative algebras with involution containing the class of Jordan algebras, Math. Ann. 237
    (1978), no. 2, 133–156.
 3. T. Ashihara and M. Miyamoto, Deformation of central charges, vertex operator algebras whose Griess algebras are Jordan
    algebras, J. Algebra 321 (2009), no. 6, 1593–1599.
 4. K. M. R. Audenaert, Variance bounds, with an application to norm bounds for commutators, Linear Algebra Appl. 432
    (2010), no. 5, 1126–1143.
 5. A. M. Bloch and A. Iserles, Commutators of skew-symmetric matrices, Internat. J. Bifur. Chaos Appl. Sci. Engrg. 15
    (2005), no. 3, 793–801.
 6. A. Böttcher and D. Wenzel, How big can the commutator of two matrices be and how big is it typically?, Linear Algebra
    Appl. 403 (2005), 216–228.
 7.         , The Frobenius norm and the commutator, Linear Algebra Appl. 429 (2008), no. 8-9, 1864–1885.
 8. M. Bremner and V. Dotsenko, Associator dependent algebras and Koszul duality, Ann. Mat. Pura Appl. (2022), Advance
    online publication.
 9. R. B. Brown and A. Gray, Vector cross products, Comment. Math. Helv. 42 (1967), 222–236.
10. C.-M. Cheng, S.-W. Vong, and D. Wenzel, Commutators with maximal Frobenius norm, Linear Algebra Appl. 432 (2010),
    no. 1, 292–306.
11. S. S. Chern, M. do Carmo, and S. Kobayashi, Minimal submanifolds of a sphere with second fundamental form of constant
    length, Functional Analysis and Related Fields (F. E. Browder, ed.), Springer, New York, 1970, pp. 59–75.
12. J. H. Conway, A simple construction for the Fischer-Griess monster group, Invent. Math. 79 (1985), no. 3, 513–540.
13. B. Eckmann, Stetige Lösungen linearer Gleichungssysteme, Comment. Math. Helv. 15 (1943), 318–339.
14. A. Elduque, Composition algebras, arXiv:1810.09979.
15. A. Elduque and H. C. Myung, On flexible composition algebras, Comm. Algebra 21 (1993), no. 7, 2481–2505.
16.         , Composition algebras satisfying the flexible law, Comm. Algebra 32 (2004), no. 5, 1997–2013.
17. J. Faraut and A. Korányi, Analysis on symmetric cones, Oxford Mathematical Monographs, The Clarendon Press Oxford
    University Press, New York, 1994.
18. D. J. F. Fox, Commutative algebras with nondegenerate invariant trace form and trace-free multiplication endomorphisms,
    arXiv:2004.12343.
19.         , Geometric structures modeled on affine hypersurfaces and generalizations of the Einstein-Weyl and affine sphere
    equations, Extended abstracts Fall 2013—geometrical analysis, type theory, homotopy theory and univalent foundations,
    Trends Math. Res. Perspect. CRM Barc., vol. 3, Birkhäuser/Springer, Cham, 2015, pp. 15–19.
20.         , Harmonic cubic homogeneous polynomials such that the norm-squared of the Hessian is a multiple of the Euclidean
    quadratic form, Anal. Math. Phys. 11 (2021), no. 1, 43.
21. E. Frenkel and D. Ben-Zvi, Vertex algebras and algebraic curves, Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, vol. 88, American
    Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2001.
22. I. Frenkel, J. Lepowsky, and A. Meurman, Vertex operator algebras and the Monster, Pure and Applied Mathematics, vol.
    134, Academic Press Inc., Boston, MA, 1988.
23. H. Freudenthal, Oktaven, Ausnahmegruppen und Oktavengeometrie, Geom. Dedicata 19 (1985), no. 1, 7–63.
24. J. Ge, F. Li, and Y. Zhou, Some generalizations of the DDVV and BW inequalities, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 374 (2021),
    no. 8, 5331–5348.
25. R. W. Gebert, Introduction to vertex algebras, Borcherds algebras and the Monster Lie algebra, Internat. J. Modern Phys.
    A 8 (1993), no. 31, 5441–5503.
26. M. Goze and E. Remm, Lie-admissible algebras and operads, J. Algebra 273 (2004), no. 1, 129–152.
27.         , Poisson algebras in terms of non-associative algebras, J. Algebra 320 (2008), no. 1, 294–317.
28. A. A. Ivanov, The Monster group and Majorana involutions, Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics, vol. 176, Cambridge
    University Press, Cambridge, 2009.
29. A.A. Ivanov, D.V. Pasechnik, Á. Seress, and S. Shpectorov, Majorana representations of the symmetric group of degree 4,
    Journal of Algebra 324 (2010), no. 9, 2432 – 2463.
30. N. Jacobson, Structure and representations of Jordan algebras, American Mathematical Society Colloquium Publications,
    Vol. XXXIX, American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I., 1968.
31. V. Kac, Vertex algebras for beginners, 2 ed., University Lecture Series, vol. 10, American Mathematical Society, Providence,
    RI, 1998.
32. M.-A. Knus, A. Merkurjev, M. Rost, and J.-P. Tignol, The book of involutions, American Mathematical Society Colloquium
    Publications, vol. 44, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1998.
33. M. Koecher, The Minnesota notes on Jordan algebras and their applications, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 1710,
    Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999.
34. F. Kosier, On a class of nonflexible algebras, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 102 (1962), 299–318.
35. C. H. Lam, On VOA associated with special Jordan algebras, Comm. Algebra 27 (1999), no. 4, 1665–1681.
36. T. Y. Lam, Introduction to quadratic forms over fields, Graduate Studies in Mathematics, vol. 67, American Mathematical
    Society, Providence, RI, 2005.
26                                                   DANIEL J. F. FOX


37. H. T. Laquer, Invariant affine connections on Lie groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 331 (1992), no. 2, 541–551.
38. Z. Lu, Normal scalar curvature conjecture and its applications, J. Funct. Anal. 261 (2011), no. 5, 1284–1308.
39. Z. Lu and D. Wenzel, The normal Ricci curvature inequality, Recent advances in the geometry of submanifolds—dedicated
    to the memory of Franki Dillen (1963–2013), Contemp. Math., vol. 674, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2016, pp. 99–110.
40. M. Markl and E. Remm, Algebras with one operation including Poisson and other Lie-admissible algebras, J. Algebra 299
    (2006), no. 1, 171–189.
41. A. Matsuo and K. Nagatomo, Axioms for a vertex algebra and the locality of quantum fields, MSJ Memoirs, vol. 4,
    Mathematical Society of Japan, Tokyo, 1999.
42. W. Meyer and W. Neutsch, Associative subalgebras of the Griess algebra, J. Algebra 158 (1993), no. 1, 1–17.
43. M. Miyamoto, Griess algebras and conformal vectors in vertex operator algebras, J. Algebra 179 (1996), no. 2, 523–548.
44. H. C. Myung, Some classes of flexible Lie-admissible algebras, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 167 (1972), 79–88.
45.         , Mal1 cev-admissible algebras, Progress in Mathematics, vol. 64, Birkhäuser Boston, Inc., Boston, MA, 1986.
46. S. Norton, The Monster algebra: some new formulae, Moonshine, the Monster, and related topics (South Hadley, MA,
    1994), Contemp. Math., vol. 193, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1996, pp. 297–306.
47. S. Okubo, Pseudo-quaternion and pseudo-octonion algebras, Hadronic J. 1 (1978), no. 4, 1250–1278.
48.         , Introduction to octonion and other non-associative algebras in physics, Montroll Memorial Lecture Series in
    Mathematical Physics, vol. 2, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995.
49. S. Okubo and H. C. Myung, Some new classes of division algebras, J. Algebra 67 (1980), no. 2, 479–490.
50.         , Adjoint operators in Lie algebras and the classification of simple flexible Lie-admissible algebras, Trans. Amer.
    Math. Soc. 264 (1981), no. 2, 459–472.
51. S. Okubo and J. M. Osborn, Algebras with nondegenerate associative symmetric bilinear forms permitting composition,
    Comm. Algebra 9 (1981), no. 12, 1233–1261.
52. G. Ovando, Two-step nilpotent Lie algebras with ad-invariant metrics and a special kind of skew-symmetric maps, J.
    Algebra Appl. 6 (2007), no. 6, 897–917.
53. H. P. Petersson, Eine Identität fünften Grades, der gewisse Isotope von Kompositions-Algebren genügen, Math. Z. 109
    (1969), 217–238.
54. E. Remm and K. Morand, Weakly associative algebras, Poisson algebras and quantization, arXiv:2005.04273.
55. H. Röhrl and M. B. Wischnewsky, Subalgebras that are cyclic as submodules, Manuscripta Math. 19 (1976), no. 2, 195–209.
56. A. A. Sagle, Malcev algebras, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 101 (1961), 426–458.
57. R. D. Schafer, On the algebras formed by the Cayley-Dickson process, Amer. J. Math. 76 (1954), 435–446.
58.         , An introduction to nonassociative algebras, Pure and Applied Mathematics, Vol. 22, Academic Press, New York,
    1966.
59. D. B. Shapiro, Compositions of quadratic forms, De Gruyter Expositions in Mathematics, vol. 33, Walter de Gruyter &
    Co., Berlin, 2000.
60. H. Shima, The geometry of Hessian structures, World Scientiﬁc Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., Hackensack, NJ, 2007.
61. H. Suzuki, Automorphism groups of multilinear maps, Osaka J. Math. 20 (1983), no. 3, 659–673.
62. V. G. Tkachev, A correction of the decomposability result in a paper by Meyer-Neutsch, J. Algebra 504 (2018), 432–439.
63. È. B. Vinberg, The theory of homogeneous convex cones, Trudy Moskov. Mat. Obšč. 12 (1963), 303–358.
64.         , Invariant norms in compact Lie algebras, Funkcional. Anal. i Priložen 2 (1968), no. 2, 89–90.
65. M. Whybrow, An infinite family of axial algebras, J. Algebra 577 (2021), 1–31.
66. Y.-D. Wu and X.-Q. Liu, A short note on the Frobenius norm of the commutator, Math. Notes 87 (2010), no. 6, 903–907.
67. X. Zhan, Matrix theory, Graduate Studies in Mathematics, vol. 147, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2013.
68. H. Zhao, On vertex operator algebras associated to Jordan algebras of Hermitian type, Comm. Algebra 48 (2020), no. 1,
    331–350.
69. A. Zohrabi and P. Zusmanovich, On Hermitian and skew-Hermitian matrix algebras over octonions, J. Nonlinear Math.
    Phys. 28 (2021), no. 1, 108–122.

   Departamento de Matemática Aplicada, Escuela Técnica Superior de Arquitectura, Universidad Politécnica
de Madrid, Av. Juan de Herrera 4, 28040 Madrid España
   Email address: daniel.fox@upm.es
